VALUATION
MEASURING AND
MANAGING THE
VALUE OF
COMPANIES
FOURTH EDITION

McKinsey & Company
Tim Koller
Marc Goedhart
David Wessels

JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC.

VALUATION
MEASURING AND
MANAGING THE
VALUE OF
COMPANIES

Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing company in
the United States. With offices in North America, Europe, Australia, and Asia, Wiley
is globally committed to developing and marketing print and electronic products and
services for our customers’ professional and personal knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Finance series contains books written specifically for finance and
investment professionals as well as sophisticated individual investors and their
financial advisers. Book topics range from portfolio management to e-commerce, risk
management, financial engineering, valuation, and financial instrument analysis, as
well as much more.
For a list of available titles, please visit our Web site at www.WileyFinance.com.

VALUATION
MEASURING AND
MANAGING THE
VALUE OF
COMPANIES
FOURTH EDITION

McKinsey & Company
Tim Koller
Marc Goedhart
David Wessels

JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC.

➇

This book is printed on acid-free paper.

Copyright © 1990, 1994, 2000, 2005 by McKinsey & Company, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright
Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through
payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600, or on the web at
www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the
Permissions Depart ment, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030,
201-748-6011, fax 201-748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best
efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied
warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created
or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies
contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional
where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any
other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or
other damages.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as
trademarks. In all instances where John Wiley & Sons, Inc., is aware of a claim, the product
names appear with initial capital or all capital letters. Readers, however, should contact the
appropriate companies for more complete information regarding trademarks and registration.
For general information on our other products and services, or technical support, please
contact our Customer Care Depart ment within the United States at 800-762-2974, outside the
United States at 317-572-3993 or fax 317-572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products,
visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Cloth edition: ISBN-10 0-471-70218-8; ISBN-13 978-0-471-70218-4
Cloth edition with CD-ROM: ISBN-10 0-471-70219-6; ISBN-13 978-0-471-70219-1
University edition: ISBN-10 0-471-70221-8; ISBN-13 978-0-471-70221-4
Workbook: ISBN-10 0-471-70216-1; ISBN-13 978-0-471-70216-0
CD-ROM: ISBN-10 0-471-70217-X; ISBN-13 978-0-471-70217-7
Web spreadsheet: ISBN-10 0-471-73389-X; ISBN-13 978-0-471-73389-8
Instructor’s Manual: ISBN-10 0-471-70220-X; ISBN-13 978-0-471-70220-7
Printed in the United States of America.
10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

About the Authors
The authors are all current or former consultants of McKinsey & Company’s corporate finance practice. Collectively they have more than 50 years
of experience in consulting and financial education.
McKinsey & Company is a management-consulting firm that helps leading
corporations and organizations make distinctive, lasting, and substantial improvements in their performance. Over the past seven decades, the
firm’s primary objective has remained constant: to serve as an organization’s most trusted external advisor on critical issues facing senior management. With consultants deployed from over 80 offices in more than 40
countries, McKinsey advises companies on strategic, operational, organizational, financial, and technological issues. The firm has extensive experience in all major industry sectors and primary functional areas, as well as
in-depth expertise in high-priority areas for today’s business leaders.
Tim Koller is a partner in McKinsey’s New York office. He leads the firm’s
Corporate Performance Center and is a member of the leadership group of
the firm’s global corporate finance practice. In his 20 years in consulting
Tim has served clients in North America and Europe on corporate strategy
and capital markets, M&A transactions, and value-based management. He
leads the firm’s research activities in valuation and capital markets. He was
formerly with Stern Stewart & Company, and Mobil Corporation. He received his MBA from the University of Chicago.
Marc Goedhart is an associate principal in McKinsey’s Amsterdam office
and a member of the leadership group of the firm’s corporate finance practice in Europe. Marc has served clients across Europe on portfolio restructuring, capital markets, and M&A transactions. He taught finance as an
v

vi

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

assistant professor at Erasmus University in Rotterdam, where he also
earned a PhD in finance.
David Wessels is an adjunct professor of finance at the Wharton School of
the University of Pennsylvania. Named by BusinessWeek as one of America’s
top business school instructors, he teaches courses on investment banking
and corporate valuation at the MBA and Executive MBA levels. David is also
a director in Wharton’s executive education group, serving on the executive
development faculties of several Fortune 500 companies. David, a former
consultant with McKinsey, received his PhD from the University of California at Los Angeles.

Preface
The first edition of this book appeared in 1990, and we are encouraged that
it continues to attract readers around the world. We believe that the book
has succeeded because the approach it advocates is grounded in universal
economic principles. While we continue to improve, update, and expand the
text as our experience grows and as business and finance continue to
evolve, the fundamental principles do not change.
The 15 years since that first edition appeared have been a truly remarkable period in business history, and managers and investors continue to
face the opportunities and challenges that emerged from it. For us, the
events of the Internet boom and its demise have only strengthened our conviction in the core principles of value creation. This may seem illogical,
given that one of the things we learned was that for some companies, during
some periods of time, the stock market may not be a reliable indicator of
value. Paradoxically, this has only strengthened our conviction that managers attune themselves even more to the underlying value of their company and how it can create more value, because signals from the stock
market may not always be reliable.
This book’s message is simple: Companies thrive when they create real
economic value for their shareholders. Companies create value by investing
capital at rates of return that exceed their cost of capital. These principles
apply across time and geography. This book explains the core principles, describes how companies can increase value by applying the principles, and
demonstrates the practical ways to implement the principles.
We wrote this book for managers (and future managers) and investors
who want their companies to create value. It is a how-to book. We hope that
it is a book that you will use again and again. If we have done our job well, it
will soon be full of underlining, margin notations, and highlighting. This is
no coffee-table book.
vii

viii

PREFACE

WHY THIS BOOK
This book began life as a handbook for McKinsey consultants. This beginning is reflected in the nature of the book. While it draws on leading-edge
academic thinking, its purpose is practical application. It aims to demystify
the field of valuation and to clarify the linkages between strategy and
finance.
We believe that clear thinking about valuation, and skill in using valuation to guide business decisions, are prerequisites for success. CEOs, business managers, and financial managers alike do not always understand
value well enough. But they must understand it if they are to do their jobs
well and fulfill their responsibilities.
In this book, we hope to lift the veil on valuation by explaining, step-bystep, how to do it well. We spell out valuation frameworks that we use in
our consulting work, and we bring these frameworks to life with detailed
case studies that highlight the practical judgments involved in developing
and using valuations. Most important, we discuss how to use valuation to
make good decisions about courses of action for a company.
This book will help business managers better understand how to:
• Decide among alternative business strategies by estimating the value
of each strategic choice.
• Develop a corporate portfolio strategy, understanding which business units a corporate parent is best positioned to own, and which
might perform better under someone else’s ownership.
• Assess major transactions, including acquisitions, divestitures, and
restructurings.
• Improve a company’s performance management systems to better
align an organization’s various parts to create value.
• Design an effective capital structure to support the corporation’s
strategy and minimize the risk of financial distress.

INTELLECTUAL FOUNDATIONS
Valuation is an age-old methodology in finance. Its intellectual origins lie in
the present value method of capital budgeting and in the valuation approach developed by Professors Merton Miller and Franco Modigliani ( both
Nobel laureates) in their 1961 Journal of Business article entitled “Dividend
Policy, Growth and the Valuation of Shares.” Our intellectual debt is primarily to them, but others have gone far to popularize their approach. In
particular, Professor Alfred Rappaport (Northwestern University) and Joel

PREFACE

ix

Stern (Stern Stewart & Co.) were among the first to extend the MillerModigliani enterprise valuation formula to real-world applications.

STRUCTURE OF THE BOOK
The book is organized in four parts. Part One provides the fundamental
principles of value creation. Part Two is a step-by-step approach to valuing a company. Part Three applies value creation principles to managerial problems. Part Four deals with more complex valuation issues and
special cases.
Part One provides an overview of value creation. Chapter 1 makes the
case that managers should focus on long-term value creation, despite the
capital market turmoil of the past several years. In Chapter 2 we develop a
picture of what it means to be a value manager through a detailed case
study based on the actual experiences of a CEO who needed to restructure
his company and create a culture dedicated to managing for value. Chapter 3 summarizes the basic principles of value creation using both a simple
case example and a rigorous derivation of these principles. Chapter 4 provides the empirical evidence supporting the discounted cash flow (DCF)
view of valuation.
Part Two—Chapters 5 through 12—is a self-contained handbook for
using discounted cash flow to value a company. A reader will learn how to
analyze historical performance, forecast free cash flows, estimate the appropriate opportunity cost of capital, identify sources of value, and interpret results. As further guidance to the practitioner, we walk through the
valuation of a company (Heineken) from an outside perspective, using publicly available information. We also show how to use multiples of comparable companies to supplement DCF valuation.
Part Three applies the value creation principles to the issues that managers face. Chapter 13 provides a framework for evaluating corporate performance, incorporating both short-term financial performance and indicators
of a company’s “health,” or its ability to create value over the long term.
Chapter 14 explains how to align a company’s performance management
process with value creation. Chapters 15 and 16 explore creating value
through mergers, acquisitions, and divestitures. Chapter 17 will guide managers as they make capital structure decisions to create value. Finally, Chapter 18 examines ways companies can improve their communications with the
financial markets.
Part Four—Chapters 19 through 25—is devoted to valuation in more
complex situations. We explore the challenges of valuing high-growth companies, companies in emerging markets, multibusiness companies, cyclical
companies, banks, and insurance companies. In addition, we show the way

x

PREFACE

uncertainty and flexibility affect value and the application of option pricing
theory and decision trees.

WHAT’S NEW ABOUT THE FOURTH EDITION
With the fourth edition, we continue to expand the practical application of
finance to real business problems, reflecting the economic events of the
past decade, new developments in academic finance, and the authors’ own
experiences. Most of the case examples and empirical analyses have been
updated, and we have reflected changes in accounting rules. We have enhanced the global perspective in the book, with extensive examples and
data from outside the United States, including discussions of both U.S.
and international accounting standards, as well as a chapter dedicated to
emerging markets.
We have substantially expanded or revised most chapters to add insights on practical applications. Among them:
• Do Fundamentals Really Drive the Stock Market? (Chapter 4), which describes the empirical evidence to support discounted cash flows, now
includes a discussion of the emerging area of behavioral finance.
• Frameworks for Valuation (Chapter 5) has been expanded to provide a
more detailed overview of the alternative DCF techniques, such as
the adjusted present value (APV) method.
• Forecasting Performance (Chapter 8) now includes practical tips on
building robust financial models.
• Estimating the Cost of Capital (Chapter 10) contains a new discussion
on the market risk premium based on recent empirical work as well
as alternative models to the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) and
practical ways to estimate beta.
• Calculating and Interpreting Results (Chapter 11) includes a more detailed
discussion of how to estimate the value of nonoperating assets and liabilities, such as unfunded pensions and stock options.
• Creating Value through Mergers and Acquisitions (Chapter 15) and Creating Value through Divestitures (Chapter 16) have added practical approaches to evaluating deals and estimating synergies.
• Valuing Flexibility (Chapter 20) incorporates a systematic approach to
comparing option pricing and decision trees as a way to value
flexibility.
• Cross-Border Valuation (Chapter 21) has been recast to account for the
fact that most major European and Asian companies have adopted
International Financial Reporting Standards.

PREFACE

xi

In addition, the fourth edition has five new chapters, including:
• Thinking about Return on Invested Capital and Growth (Chapter 6) introduces return on capital and growth as the key drivers of value. This
chapter helps executives forecast ROIC and growth by providing historical evidence on the long-term performance of companies.
• Using Multiples for Valuation (Chapter 12) explores how to use multiples to draw additional insights about valuation from comparable
companies, keeping the focus on DCF valuation.
• Performance Measurement (Chapter 13) explores the complexities of
measuring corporate performance, particularly the imperative to analyze a company’s long-term health on par with its short-term financial performance.
• Capital Structure (Chapter 17) provides a practical perspective on the
impact of capital structure on corporate value and explains how executives can use capital structure (including decisions about debt levels, dividends, and share repurchases) to support their corporate
strategies.
• Investor Communications (Chapter 18) grounds investor communications in rigorous analysis of a company’s value, its strategy story, and
its current and potential investor base.

VALUATION SPREADSHEET
An Excel spreadsheet valuation model is available on a CD-ROM or via web
download. This valuation model is similar to the model we use in practice.
Practitioners will find the model easy to use in a variety of situations:
mergers and acquisitions, valuing business units for restructuring or
value-based management, or testing the implications of major strategic decisions on the value of your company. We accept no responsibility for any
decisions based on your inputs to the model. If you would like to purchase
the model on CD, ISBN 0-471-70217-X, please call (800) 225-5945, or visit
www.WileyValuation.com to purchase the model via web download, ISBN
0-471-73389-X.

Acknowledgments

No book is solely the effort of its authors. This book is certainly no exception, especially since it grew out of the collective work of McKinsey’s corporate finance practice and the experiences of its consultants throughout
the world.
Most important, we would like to thank Tom Copeland and Jack Murrin, two of the coauthors on the first three editions of this book. We are
deeply indebted to them for establishing the early success of this book, for
mentoring the current authors, and for their hard work in providing the
foundations that this edition builds on.
Ennius Bergsma also deserves our special thanks. Ennius initiated the
development of McKinsey’s corporate finance practice in the mid-1980s. He
inspired the original internal McKinsey valuation handbook and mustered
the support and sponsorship to turn that handbook into a real book for an
external audience.
We would also like to acknowledge those who shaped our knowledge of
valuation, corporate finance, and strategy. For their support and teachings,
we thank Tony Bernardo, Bob Holthausen, Rob Kazanjian, Ofer Nemirovsky, Eduardo Schwartz, Jaap Spronk, Sunil Wahal, and Ivo Welch.
A number of colleagues worked closely with us on the fourth edition,
providing support that was essential to the completion of this edition.
André Annema, one of the longest serving members of our European corporate finance practice, led much of the analysis for three chapters: Do Fundamentals Really Drive the Stock Market? (Chapter 4) with assistance from
Terence Nahar and Fredrik Gustavsson; Creating Value through Divestitures (Chapter 16); and Cross-Border Valuation (Chapter 21). Bin Jiang,
with the support of Carrie Chen, conducted the analysis for Chapter 6,
Thinking about Return on Invested Capital and Growth, using the Corporate Performance database that she has been developing for McKinsey, and
xiii

xiv

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

which was inspired by Dick Foster. Nidhi Chadda assisted with Chapter 12,
on Using Multiples for Valuation. Richard Dobbs co-wrote Chapter 13, Performance Measurement and Chapter 14, Performance Management, with
support from Paul Todd, Vanessa Lau, and Joe Hughes. Werner Rehm cowrote Chapter 15, Creating Value through Mergers and Acquisitions. Chapter 16, Creating Value through Divestitures, draws on work by Lee
Dranikoff and Antoon Schneider. Régis Huc supported the analyses for
Chapter 17, Capital Structure, which benefited from the credit rating models developed by Harry Markl and Michael Rudolf. Jean-Hugues Monier,
Paul Adam, and Yuri Maslov provided support in the preparation of Chapter 18, Investor Communications. This chapter also draws on work by Kevin
Coyne and Jonathan Witter. S. R. Rajan drove the work on Chapter 19, Valuing Multibusiness Companies. Marijn de Wit supported the case examples
in Chapter 20, Valuing Flexibility. William Jones and Gustavo Wigman contributed to Chapter 22, Valuation in Emerging Markets, and Alexandre
Amson and Fabienne Moimaux provided support for the analyses. Marco de
Heer’s dissertation formed the basis for Chapter 24, Valuing Cyclical Companies. Susan Nolen Foushee co-wrote Chapter 25, Valuing Financial Institutions. Meg Smoot, Yasser Salem, Martijn Olthof, and Neha Patel helped
prepare the analysis and valuation of Heineken that appears throughout the
book. Neha Patel and Yan Yang helped update the valuation model CD. We
thank them all for their insights and hard work.
We would like to thank again all those who contributed to the first three
editions. We owe a special debt to Dave Furer for help and late nights developing the original drafts of this book more than 15 years ago. The first three
editions and this edition drew upon work, ideas, and analyses from Carlos
Abad, Petri Allas, Buford Alexander, Pat Anslinger, Vladimir Antikarov, Ali
Asghar, Bill Barnett, Dan Bergman, Olivier Berlage, Peter Bisson, the late
Joel Bleeke, Steve Coley, Johan Depraetere, Mikel Dodd, Will Draper, Christian von Drathen, David Ernst, Bill Fallon, George Fenn, Russ Fradin,
Gabriel Garcia, Alo Ghosh, Irina Grigorenko, Keiko Honda, Alice Hu, Mimi
James, Chris Jones, Phil Keenan, Phil Kholos, David Krieger, Shyanjaw Kuo,
Kurt Losert, Bill Lewis, Perry Moilinoff, Mike Murray, Juan Ocampo, John
Patience, Bill Pursche, Frank Richter, David Rothschild, Silvia Stefini,
Konrad Stiglbrunner, Ahmed Taha, Bill Trent, David Twiddy, Valerie Udale,
Sandeep Vaswani, Kim Vogel, Jon Weiner, Jack Welch, David Willensky,
Pieter de Wit, and David Wright.
For help in preparing the manuscript and coordinating the flow of
paper, e-mails, and phone calls, we owe our thanks to our assistants, Kimberly Davenport, Lynette Murray, Eveline de Bruijn, and Denise de Jong.
We also extend thanks to the team at John Wiley & Sons, including
Pamela van Giessen, Jennifer MacDonald, and Mary Daniello.
Of course, we could not have devoted the time and energy to this book
without the support and encouragement of McKinsey’s corporate finance

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

xv

practice leadership, in particular Richard Dobbs, Bernie Ferrari, Christian
Caspar, and Jan Willem Breen. We are also indebted to Fred Gluck, a former
managing director of McKinsey, who supported the creation of the corporate finance practice in the late 1980s and who played a vital role in creating
a knowledge-building culture within McKinsey.
Stuart Flack, in addition to providing moral support based on his experience with other book projects, ensured that we received superior editorial
support from McKinsey’s external publishing team.
Joanne Mason, along with Richard Dobbs and Bill Javetski, planned and
executed the launch of this book, helping us to get the word out, orchestrating articles, speeches, and meetings. When we thought our task complete
with the writing of the manuscript, they gently reminded us otherwise and
kept us going.
Dennis Swinford oversaw the production of the more than 300 exhibits
in this book, a truly Herculean task given the variety of formats and technologies employed. We are grateful for his hard work and patience.
Bill Javetski was in many ways the fourth author of this book. He edited
the entire manuscript, ensuring consistency of style and structure. Most
important, he served as our coach, sounding board, and occasional arbiter,
participating in every meeting and conference call among the authors, debating the structure of each chapter, and helping us find the best language
to make it accessible to every reader. Karen Schenkenfelder provided careful editing and feedback throughout the process. Sue Catapano diligently
checked important references.
The University Edition of this book includes end-of-chapter questions
and an instructor’s resource guide based on the material in this book. In addition, a professional workbook accompanies this book. We would like to
thank Professor Jeffrey P. Lessard at the Rochester Institute of Technology
for preparing the questions for the University Edition and for creating the
Valuation Workbook. This workbook, originally developed by Bill Foote, is an
important complement to the text for practitioners and students alike.
Finally, thank you to Melissa Koller, Monique Donders, Jennifer
Wessels, and our children. Our wives and families are our true inspirations. This book would not have been possible without their encouragement, support, and sacrifice.

Contents
Part One

Foundations of Value

1 Why Maximize Value?
2 The Value Manager

3
23

3 Fundamental Principles of Value Creation

47

4 Do Fundamentals Really Drive the Stock Market?
Part Two

71

Core Valuation Techniques

5 Frameworks for Valuation

103

6 Thinking about Return on Invested Capital and Growth
7 Analyzing Historical Performance
8 Forecasting Performance

135

161

233

9 Estimating Continuing Value

275

10 Estimating the Cost of Capital

297

11 Calculating and Interpreting Results
12 Using Multiples for Valuation

339

371

Part Three Making Value Happen
13 Performance Measurement

393

14 Performance Management

415

15 Creating Value through Mergers and Acquisitions
16 Creating Value through Divestitures
17 Capital Structure

437

465

487

18 Investor Communications

523
xvii

xviii

CONTENTS

Part Four

Advanced Valuation Issues

19 Valuing Multibusiness Companies
20 Valuing Flexibility

547

559

21 Cross-Border Valuation

591

22 Valuation in Emerging Markets

621

23 Valuing High-Growth Companies
24 Valuing Cyclical Companies
25 Valuing Financial Institutions

655

671
681

Appendix A

Economic Profit and the Key Value
Driver Formula
711

Appendix B

Discounted Economic Profit Equals Discounted
Free Cash Flow
713

Appendix C

Adjusted Present Value Equals Discounted Free
Cash Flow
715

Appendix D

Levering and Unlevering the Cost of Equity

Appendix E

Leverage and the Price-Earnings Multiple

Index

729

719
725

VALUATION
MEASURING AND
MANAGING THE
VALUE OF
COMPANIES

Part One

Foundations of Value

1
Why Maximize Value?
Chief executives from North America to Europe and Asia may be forgiven if
they appear perplexed as they try to figure out how to lead their companies
following the tumultuous business evolution of the past decade. A 20-year
bull market in equities that began in 1980 carried nearly every company on
an upward spiral of wealth generation. Shareholders who reaped these rewards cheered CEOs even as executives built up lucrative stock option packages and in some cases attained rock-star celebrity status. By the time the
Internet frenzy peaked at the end of the 1990s, even staunch traditionalists
like Warren Buffett pondered whether the economy had entered a new era
of prosperity unbounded by traditional constraints. Some economists took
to questioning long-held tenets of competitive advantage, and “new economy” analysts asked, with the utmost seriousness, why a three-year-oldmoney-losing Internet purveyor of pet supplies shouldn’t be worth more
than a billion dollars.
The subsequent market crash left aftershocks that have yet to be sorted
out as we prepare this book. The Internet, source of the dot-com fever, continues to change the way we shop, communicate, and manage; but its assault on the fundamental laws of economics has been brusquely turned
back. The sky-high market capitalizations of many Internet companies
proved to be simply unsustainable, and their plunge has left a generation of
chastened investors in search of a new approach. A flurry of major corporate accounting scandals turned hero CEOs into villains, spawned government investigations and new regulations, and unleashed a new spirit of
shareholder activism whose impact on corporate governance has yet to fully
play out. For their part, U.S. business groups have begun to challenge the
authority of regulators to impose new rules.
Ironically, one thing that did not change was the stock market’s obsession with quarterly earnings. This focus continues to confront business
leaders with the dilemma of often having to choose between short-term results and the long-term health of the companies they lead.
3

4

WHY MAXIMIZE VALUE?

The good news? Amid this angst and uncertainty, executives and investors alike can draw reassurance from an important trend that has gained
momentum even through years of the market’s twists and turns. More and
more investors, analysts, and investment bankers are turning to fundamental financial analysis and sophisticated discounted cash flow (DCF) models
as the touchstone of corporate valuation.
This book explains how to value companies using the DCF approach
and apply that information to make wiser business and investment decisions. With DCF, assumptions about a company’s profits and cash flows
years down the road determine a company’s stock price. Using it, CEOs can
focus on long-term value creation, confident that their stock’s market price
will eventually reflect their efforts. This is not a book for traders looking to
profit from short-term movements in share prices. Nor is it intended for
managers trying to manage their company’s share price from quarter to
quarter. It’s purpose is to help managers looking to create lasting value in
their companies.
Managers who focus on shareholder value create healthier companies,
which in turn provide spillover benefits, such as stronger economies, higher
living standards, and more employment opportunities. Our central message: Companies thrive when they create real economic value for their
shareholders.
The movement underway to improve corporate governance will encourage companies to focus on long-term value creation. Managers and board
members, therefore, should set long-term shareholder value creation as
their primary objective. This book tells managers how, explaining specifically what it means to create sustainable value and how to measure value
creation.
In the chapters that follow, we lay out the principles of value creation
with examples and supporting empirical evidence. Companies create value
by investing capital at rates of return that exceed their cost of capital. The
more capital they can invest at attractive rates of return, the more value
they will create, and as long as returns on capital exceed the cost of that
capital, faster growth will create more value. Furthermore, value creation
plans must always be grounded in realistic assessments of product market
opportunities and the competitive environment. We also explore how value
creation principles must be part of important decisions such as corporate
strategy, mergers, acquisitions, divestitures, capital structure, and investor
communications. We explain why value creation should be part of a company’s culture and how it manages itself on a day-to-day basis. And we provide detailed explanations for measuring value.
These fundamental principles have been around for a long time, and
the events of the recent past have only strengthened our conviction in
them. This may seem counterintuitive, since we learned during the recent
past that financial markets may not have been as efficient as we thought

MARKETS TRACK ECONOMIC FUNDAMENTALS

5

they were. At times, the stock market may not be a reliable indicator of a
company’s intrinsic value. Paradoxically, the fact that markets can deviate
from intrinsic values means that managers have to be more attuned to the
underlying value of their businesses and how their companies go about
creating value, because they can’t always rely on signals from the stock
market.
Specifically, managers must not only have a theoretical understanding
of value creation, but must be able to create tangible links between their
strategies and value creation. This means, for example, focusing less on recent financial performance and more on what they are doing to create a
“healthy” company that can create value over the longer term. It means
having a thorough grounding in the economics of an industry and setting
aspirations accordingly. Once they’ve mastered the economics of value
creation, they need to be able to educate their internal and external constituents. They need to install performance management systems that encourage real value creation, not merely short-term accounting results.
Finally, they need to educate their investors about how and when the company will create value.
These principles apply equally to mature manufacturing companies
and high-growth technology companies. They apply to companies in all geographies. When managers, boards of directors, and investors forget these
simple truths, the consequences can be destructive. Consider the rise and
fall of business conglomerates in the 1970s, hostile takeovers in the United
States in the 1980s, the collapse of Japan’s bubble economy in the 1990s, the
Southeast Asian crisis in 1998, the Internet bubble, and the corporate governance scandals of the late 1990s.
We begin this chapter by arguing that, from a long-term perspective,
the stock market does indeed track the fundamental performance of companies and the economy. When deviations arise, they typically come from
individual sectors and rarely last more than a couple of years. Deviations
from fundamentals occur when companies, investors and bankers ignore
the principles of economics or assume that they have changed.

MARKETS TRACK ECONOMIC FUNDAMENTALS
The U.S. stock market’s behavior from 1980 through today has confused
and frustrated investors and managers. For roughly 20 of those years, the
market was quite bullish as the Standard & Poor’s (S&P) 500 index rose
from a level of 108 in January 1980 to 1,469 in December 1999. Including
dividends, the nominal annual return to shareholders was 17 percent,
or 13 percent after adjusting for inflation, more than double the 61⁄ 2 percent average annual return that stocks have delivered over the past 100
years. By early 2000, many investors had come to expect consistently high

6

WHY MAXIMIZE VALUE?

returns from equity investing. Then the market abruptly fell, tumbling
more than 30 percent over the next three years. Such a large run-up, followed by such a sharp decline, led many to question whether the stock
market was anything more than a giant roulette table, essentially unconnected to the real world.
The stock market’s performance, however, can be explained. More important, the explanation derives directly from the real economy, in terms of
inflation, interest rates, growth in gross domestic product, and corporate
profits. This relationship may not be perfect, but research shows that deviations from what we call a company’s fundamental, or intrinsic, value based
on financial performance and risk, tend to be short-lived and most often
limited to certain industrial or service sectors.
The stock market’s real surprise lies, not in the occurrence of spectacular share price bubbles, but rather in how closely the market has mirrored
economic fundamentals throughout a century of technological revolutions,
monetary changes, political and economic crises, and wars. And it is not
just true for the U.S. stock market. We believe stock markets in the United
States, Europe, and Asia correctly reflect these regions’ different underlying economic prospects.

The Stock Market ’s Long-Term Returns
U.S. equities over the past 200 years have on average returned about 61⁄ 2 percent annually, adjusted for inflation. Spectacular market bubbles, crashes,
or scandals occasionally captivate public attention, as they did during the
recent high-tech market frenzy, the accounting scandals of the late 1990s,
the Black Monday crash in October 1987, the leveraged-buyout craze of the
1980s, and of course the great Wall Street crash of 1929. But against the
backdrop of decade after decade of consistent stock returns, the effect of
any of these single events pales. At a minimum, as Exhibit 1.1 shows, stock
markets are far from chaotic and do not lead a life of their own.
That 61⁄2 percent long-term real return on common stocks is no random
number either. Its origins lie in the fundamental performance of companies
and the returns investors have expected for taking on the risk of investing
in companies. One way to understand this linkage is to examine the economy’s underlying performance and its relationship to stocks. After adjusting for inflation, median price-to-earnings ratios (P/E) tend to revert to a
normal level of about 15, suggesting that the typical investor’s risk-return
trade-offs haven’t changed much over the past 100 years. Assuming that investor risk preferences have not changed, we can easily connect shareholders’ long-term returns with the fundamental performance of companies.
Over the past 70 years, real corporate profits have grown about 3 to 3.5
percent per year. If P/E ratios revert to a normal level over time, stock prices
should also increase about 3 to 3.5 percent per year. In addition, corporate

MARKETS TRACK ECONOMIC FUNDAMENTALS

7

Exhibit 1.1 Shareholder Return Indexes, 1801–2003
Stocks

$100,000,000
$10,000,000
$1,000,000
$100,000

Bonds
Bills

$10,000
$1,000
$100

Gold
CPI

$10

2001

1981

1961

1941

1921

1901

1881

1861

1841

1821

$0

1801

$1

Source: The authors wish to thank Jeremy J. Siegel for his update to this data, which first appeared in Stocks for the Long Run: The
Definitive Guide to Financial Market Returns and Long-Term Investment Strategies. 2002, New York: McGraw Hill.

America, as a whole, typically reinvests about 50 percent of its profits every
year to achieve this profit growth, leaving the other half to pay to shareholders as dividends and share repurchases. This translates to a cash yield
to shareholders of about 3 to 3.5 percent at the long-term average P/E ratio
of 15.1 Adding the annual 3 to 3.5 percent increase in share prices to the
cash yield of 3 to 3.5 percent results in total real shareholder returns of
about 61⁄2 percent per year.

The Link between Market Price Levels and Fundamentals
Now we need to look at the level of the stock market at different points in
time and compare that with what one might expect, given the fundamental performance of companies and the economy. The results show that the
overall market tracks our expected fundamental value closely over the
past 40 years.
Using a discounted cash flow model, we estimated the intrinsic value
for the median company in the U.S. stock market for each year from 1962 to
2003 (see Chapter 4 for more details). We used long-term trends to project

1
The payout ratio is driven by a company’s growth and its return on capital. The 50 percent
payout ratio is based on a typical company earning a 12 percent return on equity and growing
at 3.5 percent in real terms, or 5 to 6 percent including inf lation. The cash yield of 3.5 percent
equals the inverse of the price-earnings ratio times the payout ratio.

8

WHY MAXIMIZE VALUE?

Exhibit 1.2 Predicted P/E Tracks Actual P/E

25

Actual P/E1

20

15

Predicted P/E1

10

5

0
1962

1966

1970

1974

1978

1982

1986

1990

1994

1998

2002

¹Twelve-month forward-looking price-to-earnings ratio.
Source: IBES, McKinsey.

profit growth, the cost of equity, and returns on equity. We based inflation
projections on the most recent year’s inflation. To keep the scale constant,
we expressed fundamental values in terms of P/E ratios.
Exhibit 1.2 compares our resulting intrinsic values with actual P/E ratios for the median company. As you can see, the P/E ratios associated
with our estimates of intrinsic value track the actual P/E ratios, except for
the late 1990s Internet bubble. The stock market follows a clear and simple
economic logic over the long term; there is not much complexity or chaos
in these patterns, despite what some have argued. We conducted similar
tests—and found similar results—in the United Kingdom and broader European markets.

What Was behind the 20-Year Bull Market . . .
During the prolonged bull market in the United States from 1980 to 1999,
many investors concluded that this period of growth meant that the stock
market had somehow changed. From then on, they figured, companies
would be valued permanently higher, and high returns would continue for

MARKETS TRACK ECONOMIC FUNDAMENTALS

9

a long time to come. Many investors and commentators simply extrapolated
from the recent past, predicting ongoing high returns because they could
perceive nothing that would stop them. Others developed reasoned arguments to back the same view. In 1999, two economists, James Glassman and
Kevin Hassett, published a book titled Dow 36,000: The New Strategy for
Profiting from the Coming Rise in the Stock Market.2 Glassman and Hassett
predicted that the Dow Jones Industrial Average would reach 36,000 sometime in the 2002 to 2004 period, after rising from 700 in 1980 to 11,000 in
1999. They argued that investors were beginning to realize that stocks
were low risk, and were thus bidding up stock prices. Others argued that
stocks were gaining broader acceptance and that higher demand for stocks
would push up prices.
These investors and commentators had failed to understand the real
factors behind the long bull market. In our analysis, we identified three
elements that were responsible for nearly all the change in the broad market index. The first two, growth in earnings and declines in interest rates
and inflation, were precisely the factors one would expect to influence
share prices. The third was the temporary emergence of what we call megacapitalization stocks associated with the Internet bubble of the late 1990s
(see Exhibit 1.3).
Between 1980 and 1999, earnings per share for the S&P 500 rose from
$15 to $56. If the forward P/E ratio had remained constant, earnings growth
alone would have boosted the index by 302 points. This nominal annual
growth in earnings of 6.9 percent equals 3.2 percent in real terms, close to
the long-term average growth in real profits for the economy.
Simultaneously, U.S. interest rates and inflation fell dramatically. Longterm U.S. government bond yields peaked at nearly 15 percent in 1981 and
then fell, more or less steadily, to 5.7 percent in 1999. The decline in inflation and interest rates drove P/E ratios back up to more typical levels. This
occurred because during the high-inflation years, companies were unable
to increase returns on capital commensurate with the rise in cost of capital,
leading to extremely low P/E ratios.
We attribute much of the remaining increase to a lopsided distribution
of value within the index. Between 1997 and 1999, a handful of companies,
including Cisco, EMC, and General Electric, attained market capitalizations
in the hundreds of billions of dollars, at very high P/E ratios. By 1999, the
average P/E of these megacap stocks, representing the 30 largest companies
in the index, was twice that of the other 470. Such a divergence in P/E ratios
had no precedent in the prior 40 years and has not been definitively explained. As this gap emerged, the resulting increase in forward P/E ratios
2

J. Glassman and K. Hassett, Dow 36,000: The New Strategy for Profiting from the Coming Rise in the
Stock Market (New York: Times Books, 1999).

10

WHY MAXIMIZE VALUE?

Exhibit 1.3 Increase in the S&P 500 Index, January 1980–December 1999
243

1,469

Other

S&P 500
December 31,
1999

376

440

302

108

S&P 500
January 1,
1980

Increase
in earnings

Decrease in
inflation and
interest rates

Emergence
of megacap
stocks1

1

Measured as the change in the spread between the average and median PE ratio.

accounted for an additional 376 points of the increase in the S&P 500 from
1980 to 1999.

. . . And the Bear Market That Followed
The same factors were at work as the index tumbled almost 40 percent between the end of 1999 and the end of 2002. Much of the decline was due to
a reversal of the gap in P/Es between the megacap stocks and the rest of
the market.
In 1999, investors should have realized that share prices could not continue increasing at 17 percent per year. Whereas they might count on corporate profits to continue increasing as the economy grew, interest rates and
inflation had reached very low levels and were not likely to boost P/E ratios
by declining further. Whether or not you believed that the valuations of the
megacap stocks were valid, it would have been unreasonable to expect that
they could continue to boost the overall market’s P/E in the way they had
previously.
Dissecting the causes of the 20-year bull market and the bear market
that followed demonstrates something else, too: Periodic deviations from
fundamental values do occur. Fortunately, these deviations tend to be concentrated in a small number of stocks, as shown by the behavior of the market in the late 1990s and early 2000s.

MARKETS TRACK ECONOMIC FUNDAMENTALS

11

Stocks Behaving Badly
Consider the distribution of shareholder returns stretching from March
1997 through March 2000. In Exhibit 1.4, the bars represent the number of
companies in the S&P 500 that increased, by a given amount, over the period. The light-gray bars represent companies in the Technology-MediaTelecommunications (TMT) sector. The dark-gray bars represent the
megacap companies. The distribution is somewhat normal, but the TMT and
megacap stocks are skewed to the right with the highest returns. The nonTMT stocks increased a median of 21 percent, whereas the megacap and
TMT stocks increased a median of 62 percent.
The bear market that settled in between March 2000 and March 2003
was a reversal of the TMT bubble (see Exhibit 1.5). The majority of large decliners were the TMT and megacap companies. In fact, the median S&P 500
company declined only 8 percent from peak to trough, while the index itself, which is value weighted, to give more clout to the mostly highly valued companies, declined by almost 40 percent. Interestingly, fully 40
percent of the companies in the S&P 500 actually increased in value during
the bear market.
Most of the companies in the S&P 500 index never went through the
major gyrations of the TMT sectors. In other words, the U.S. stock market
bubble of the late 1990s was for the most part a large sector bubble. Sector

Exhibit 1.4 Bull Market Driven by TMT Sectors and Megacap Companies1
Number of S&P 500 companies per TRS category, March 1997–March 2000
Median:
32 percent

80

Companies in TMT sectors
Megacap companies

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
–100
percent

1

0
percent

Megacap companies in the TMT sectors are included with the TMT companies.

>300
percent

12

WHY MAXIMIZE VALUE?

Exhibit 1.5 Bear Market Driven by a Reversal in TMT and
Megacap Values
Number of S&P 500 companies per TRS category, March 2000–March 2003
Median:
–8 percent

80

Companies in TMT sectors
Megacap companies

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
–100
percent

0
percent

>100
percent

bubbles occur frequently, but generally they are not large enough to distort
a broad market index such as the S&P 500.

Maintaining Perspective
It is important to put the recent stock market bubble into its proper perspective. First, against the background of long-term market returns, the
1990s’ market bubble was not as dramatic as other market events, such as
the inflation-induced bear market of the 1970s. Second, sector bubbles have
occurred before and no doubt will return in the future. They arise when
some market players do not stick to fundamental economic rules because of
greed, ignorance, or both. However, this does not mean that the market as a
whole is detached from economic reality.
The European markets experienced a similar bubble in the late 1990s. In
Europe, however, companies beyond the TMT sectors experienced extreme
share price changes. Thus, the European bear market was much less of a
sector phenomenon than it was in the United States. We are not certain why
the European boom and bust was broader and flatter, but several factors
probably influenced it. First, Europe’s monetary unification in the late
1990s may have produced excessive optimism about the benefits that would
flow from growth and productivity increases resulting from deeper economic integration. When the U.S. market turned down, the euphoria may
have triggered an overly pessimistic response on the part of investors.

MARKETS TRACK ECONOMIC FUNDAMENTALS

13

Another factor may have been that Europe’s corporate incumbents stood
more likely to capture benefits from the new economy than their United
States counterparts, where small start-up companies were better financed.
Finally, European investors may have bid up prices to match those of the
U.S. market without fully grasping that U.S. stock prices were mainly driven by TMT stocks, a sector that has a far more modest role in Europe.

Cross-Country Comparisons
Differences in fundamental economic performance also explain variations in
performance from country to country. A look at the 100-year real returns for
the stock markets of 16 countries shows a range of returns from 2.5 percent
per year in Belgium to 7.6 percent in Sweden, with most countries between 4.5
percent and 7.0 percent, as shown in Exhibit 1.6. Anecdotally, the countries
with the lowest returns have been those that experienced the most economic
upheaval, often with long periods of high inflation, civil strife, or defeat in
war. The high returns in South Africa and Australia flowed from these countries’ dependence on metals and mining, sectors that happened to earn high
returns during this period. Also, most of these markets have relatively few
companies listed on stock markets, compared with the United States and
United Kingdom, so they may not be representative of the entire economy.
In addition to higher returns in the United States, P/E and marketto-book ratios have been significantly higher for the U.S. market when

Exhibit 1.6 Real TRS around the World, 1900–2000
percent
Sweden

7.6

Australia

7.5

South Africa

6.8

United States

6.7
6.4

Canada
5.8

Netherlands

5.8

United Kingdom
5.0

Switzerland

4.8

Ireland
Denmark

4.6

Japan

4.5

France

3.8
3.6

Spain

3.4

Germany
Italy
Belgium

2.7
2.5

Source: Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, and Mike Staunton, Triumph of the Optimists: 101 Years of Global Investment Returns.
2002, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

14

WHY MAXIMIZE VALUE?

Exhibit 1.7 US Companies Valued Higher than Europe and Asia
Median market-to-book ratio for selected markets
5

4
S&P 500
China1
Europe top 5002

3

2

Nikkei 225 (Japan)
Hang Seng (Hong Kong)

1
KOSPI (South Korea)
0
1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

1
Index from Institutional Brokers Estimate System.
2

500 largest European companies by market capitalization.

compared with Europe and key Asian markets (see Exhibit 1.7). Although
accounting rules, monetary conditions, and corporate governance have differed over time, performance differences can explain much of the difference in valuation, particularly in the case of return on capital. U.S.
companies, for example, consistently earned higher returns on capital than
companies in Europe and Asia (see Exhibit 1.8). We see this as further proof
that economic fundamentals drive stock markets.

Exhibit 1.8 US Companies Earn Higher Returns on Equity
Median return on equity (ROE) for selected markets
20

15
S&P 500
Europe top 5001
10
Asia Average2
5

0
1993

1995

1997

1
500 largest European companies by market capitalization.
2

1999

2001

2003

Based on median ROE of companies in Nikkei 225 (Japan), KOSPI (South Korea), Hang Seng (Hong Kong), and IBES (China).

DEVIATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH SLOPPY ECONOMIC ANALYSIS

15

DEVIATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH SLOPPY ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
An implication emerges from the stock market’s overall reflection of longterm economic fundamentals: Deviations are usually short-lived, focused
on a particular segment of the economy, or both. Managers are therefore
best off focusing their energy on long-term value creation and not worrying
about the latest stock market trends. In fact, when managers and market
participants take their eye off the fundamentals of long-term value creation,
market bubbles can result. Two examples come to mind: the LBO bubble in
the late 1980s and the Internet bubble a decade later.

The LBO Bubble
In the early 1980s the U.S. Federal Reserve wrestled inflation under control,
the U.S. economy began to grow again, and companies and investors rediscovered the confidence to innovate. A market for corporate control emerged,
in which companies and private investors (later grouped under the moniker
of corporate raiders) demonstrated their ability to successfully undertake hostile takeovers of poorly performing companies. Once in control, the new
owners would often improve operations, divest unrelated businesses, and
then resell the newly made-over company for a substantial profit. Although
large companies led many of the early hostile takeovers, the emergence of
high-yield bond financing opened the door for smaller investors, known as
leveraged-buyout (LBO) firms, to take a leading role in the hostile-takeover game.
The LBO firms’ early successes attracted the attention of other investors,
commercial bankers, and investment bankers. Every year, more LBO firms
formed to go after deals, investment bankers scrambled to identify opportunities, and lenders saw opportunities to earn lucrative fees. In 1981, 99 LBO
deals took place in the United States; by 1988, the number was 381. Early on,
LBO players grounded their deal activity in solid analysis and realistic economics. Yet as the number of participants in the hot market increased, discipline declined. The swelling ranks of LBO firms bid up prices for takeover
prospects encouraged by investment bankers, who stood to reap large advisory fees, as well as with the help of commercial bankers, who were willing to
support aggressive financing plans.
We have reviewed some financial projections that underpinned several
high-profile LBO bankruptcies in the late 1980s. Many of these transactions
were based on assumptions that the companies could achieve levels of performance, revenue growth, operating margins, and capital utilization never before achieved in their industry. The buyers of these companies typically had
no concrete plans for executing the financial performance necessary to meet
their obligations. In many such transactions, the buyers simply assumed that
they could resell pieces of the acquired companies for a higher price to someone else.

16

WHY MAXIMIZE VALUE?

Why wouldn’t investors see through such shoddy analyses? In many of
these failed transactions, bankers and loan committees felt great pressure to
keep up with their peers and generate big up-front fees, so they approved
highly questionable loans. In other cases, each participant assumed someone
else had carefully done the homework. Buyers assumed that if they could get
financing, the deal must be good. High-yield bond investors figured that the
commercial bankers providing the senior debt must surely have worked their
numbers properly. After all, the bankers selling the bonds had their reputations at stake, and the buyers had some capital in the game as well.
Whatever the assumption, however, the immutable laws of economics
and value creation prevailed. Many deals went under. Since then, participants seem to have learned their lesson. Today, LBO deals are typically built
on more moderate levels of debt and are mostly based on sound economics,
though recent signs of too much capital chasing too few deals are troubling.
LBO deals and high-yield debt continue to thrive and play an important role
in corporate restructuring and value creation.

The Internet Bubble
A decade after the heyday of the LBO deal, the business world once again
found itself consumed by a frenzy, this time around the development of the
Internet. When Netscape Communications became a public company in
1995, the company saw its market capitalization soar to $6 billion on an annual revenue base of just $85 million, the financial world quickly became
convinced that the Internet would change the world. That set off a race to
create companies and take them public. Between 1995 and 2000, more than
4,700 companies went public in the United States and Europe, many with
billion-dollar-plus market capitalizations. Such apparently easy wealth led
individual investors to quickly invest in the stock market. The trend gave
birth to a new kind of investing animal, the day trader, who specialized in
trading stocks for the money that could be earned from short-term swings.
As the bull market rolled on, many investors amassed impressive paper
wealth before the excitement ended. The NASDAQ index, a proxy for technology stocks, increased from 2,010 in January 1997 to 5,047 at its peak in
March 2000. It subsequently fell to 1,945 in December 2001.
During the mania of the Internet boom, some real substance fed the
hype amid the rise in share values. Many of the companies born in this era,
including Amazon.com, eBay, and Yahoo! have created and are likely to create substantial profits and economic value. But for every solid, innovative
new business idea, there were dozens of companies that represented the triumph of hype over experience in terms of their ability to generate revenue
or profit in either the short or long term.
As with the LBO era, many executives and investors either forgot or
purposely threw out fundamental rules of economics in the rarified air of

DEVIATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH SLOPPY ECONOMIC ANALYSIS

17

the Internet revolution. Consider the concept of increasing returns to scale,
also known as “network effects” or “demand-side economies of scale.” The
idea enjoyed great popularity during the 1990s after Carl Shapiro and Hal
Varian, professors at the University of California–Berkeley, described it in a
book titled Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy.3
The basic idea is this: In certain situations, as companies get bigger,
they can earn higher margins and return on capital because their product
becomes more valuable with each customer who purchases it. In most industries, competition forces returns back to reasonable levels. But in socalled increasing-return industries, returns become high and stay there.
Take Microsoft’s Office software, which provides word processing,
spreadsheets, and graphics. It is important for customers to be able to
share their work with others, so they are unwilling to purchase and use
competing products. As the installed base gets bigger and bigger, it becomes even more attractive for customers to use Office for these tasks.
Because of this advantage, Microsoft earns 75 percent margins and operating profits of $7 billion on this product, one of the most profitable products of all time.
As the Microsoft example illustrates, the concept of increasing returns
to scale is sound economics. What was unsound during the Internet era
was its application to almost every product and service related to the Internet. Shapiro and Varian describe the rare conditions that permit increasing
returns to scale. In the case of Microsoft Office, a key driver is the desire
for compatibility to share documents. But during the Internet bubble, the
concept was misinterpreted to mean that merely getting big faster than
your competitors in a given market would result in enormous profits. Some
analysts applied the idea to mobile-phone service providers, even though
customers can and do easily switch from provider to provider, forcing these
providers to compete largely on price. The same logic seemed to apply to
Internet grocery delivery services, even though the result of attracting
more customers is that these services need more drivers, trucks, warehouses, and inventory.
The Internet bubble years were full of such intellectual shortcuts to justify absurd share prices for technology companies. The history of innovation has shown how difficult it is to earn monopoly-sized rents except in
very limited circumstances. But that was no matter to the commentators
who ignored those lessons. Those who questioned the new economics were
branded as people who simply “didn’t get it”—the new-economy equivalents of the defenders of Ptolemaic astronomy.
When the laws of economics prevailed, as they always do, competition
reined in returns in most product areas. The Internet has revolutionized the
3
C. Shapiro and H. Varian, Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy (Boston:
Harvard Business School Press, 1999).

18

WHY MAXIMIZE VALUE?

economy, as have other innovations, but it could not render obsolete the
rules of economics and competition.
The Internet bubble shows what happens when managers, investors, and
bankers ignore the fundamental principles of economics and the underlying
history of value creation. It was also a classic example of herding behavior, as
investors, managers, and commentators followed the crowd instead of relying on their own independent analysis. For example, many equity analysts
could not justify the values of companies based on fundamentals, so they resorted to commenting only on relative values—how one company was valued relative to another—instead of dealing in absolute terms.

CHANGES IN CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND
SHAREHOLDER INFLUENCE
With share prices steadily rising for 20 years, shareholders accepted the
oversized pay packages CEOs began to take home. Boards of directors
reaped windfalls as well, so they were unlikely to ask hard questions about
the value-creation priorities of senior management. But in the wake of corporate scandals and a market correction back to more historical levels,
shareholders, regulators, and boards have become engaged in a struggle
with executive management. The objective is to remake the corporate landscape in a way that restores the faith of battered shareholders and imposes
greater discipline on management to focus on long-term value creation.
Some initial actions have been controversial. Reforms under the SarbanesOxley legislation passed by the U.S. Congress create strict requirements for
CEOs and CFOs to attest to the validity of their financial statements and to
strengthen and document internal control processes. In Europe, many countries have also adopted corporate governance codes. In the Netherlands, the
traditional corporate form (known as Structuur NV) was radically reformed in 2004. Under the old law, the supervisory boards of most major
companies elected themselves, and shareholders had no say in the choice of
directors. Soon shareholders will be able to elect the board members of the
companies whose shares they own.
Shareholders, particularly large institutional investors, have become
more activist in the companies they own, especially when they oppose the
strategic direction management is taking. In 2003, shareholders voted down
a proposed pay package for the CEO of one of the United Kingdom’s largest
companies. The following year, many large companies in the United States,
including Boeing, Dell, the Walt Disney Company, Oracle, and Tenet Healthcare, separated the roles of chairman and chief executive officer, sometimes
under shareholder pressure.
Board members are looking for ways to improve their oversight of
companies. In a recent survey of 150 U.S. corporate directors, 72 percent

FOCUSING ON VALUE LEADS TO HEALTHIER COMPANIES

19

supported separating the roles of CEO and chairman, an approach that
has been standard practice at companies in the United Kingdom and
Europe for many years.4 In the same survey, board directors expressed
support for the need to improve the accountability of the board and to reform executive compensation.
The crosscurrents of corporate scandals, newly active shareholders and
board members, and regulatory reforms are not easy to read. But in the
wake of the corporate excesses of the past decade, it is safe to say that there
will be more pressure on CEOs to build long-term shareholder value.

FOCUSING ON VALUE LEADS TO HEALTHIER COMPANIES
Why should management’s primary objective be long-term value creation?
Companies dedicated to value creation are healthier and build stronger
economies, higher living standards, and more opportunities for individuals.
There has long been vigorous debate on the importance of shareholder
value relative to other measures such as employment, social responsibility,
and the environment. The debate is often cast in terms of shareholder versus stakeholder. At least in ideology and legal frameworks, the United
States and the United Kingdom have given the most weight to the idea that
shareholders are the owners of the corporation, the board of directors is
their representative and elected by them, and the objective function of the
corporation is to maximize shareholder value.
In continental Europe, an explicitly broader view of the objectives of
business organizations has long been more influential. In many cases, it is
embedded in the governance structures of the corporate form of organization. In the Netherlands and Germany, the board of a large corporation has
its fiduciary duties toward the corporation (e.g., in support of the continuity
of the business in the interests of all its stakeholders), not only toward shareholders in the pursuit of value maximization. Similar philosophies lay at the
foundation of corporate governance in other continental European countries.
Pursuing shareholder value does not mean that other stakeholders suffer. Consider employee stakeholders. A company that tries to fatten its profits by providing a shabby work environment, underpaying employees, and
skimping on benefits will have trouble attracting and retaining high-quality employees. With today’s increased labor mobility and more educated
workforce, such a company would be less profitable. While it may feel good
to treat people well, it is also good business.
When examining employment, we found that the United States and European companies that created the most shareholder value in the past 15
years have shown healthier employment growth. In Exhibit 1.9, companies
with the highest total returns to shareholders (TRS) also had the largest
4

R. Felton, “ What Directors and Investors Want from Governance Reform,” McKinsey Quarterly,
2 (2004): pp. 30–39.

20

WHY MAXIMIZE VALUE?

Exhibit 1.9 Correlation between TRS and Employment Growth
percent

Yearly average TRS

United States, 1988-2003

Europe, 1993-2003

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

–10

–10

–20

–20

–30

–30
–40

–40
–40

–20

0

20

–40

40

–20

0

20

40

Yearly average growth in employees

Yearly average growth in employees

increases in employment. We also tested this link within individual sectors
of the economy and found similar results.
Another often-expressed concern is that companies that emphasize creating value for shareholders are shortsighted. We disagree. For example, we
found a strong positive correlation between shareholder returns and investments in research and development (R&D). As shown in Exhibit 1.10, com-

Exhibit 1.10 Correlation between TRS and R&D Expenditures
percent
U.S. listed companies, 1993-2003

Yearly average
Total return to shareholders

60
40
20
0
–20
–40
–60
–40

–20

0

20

40

60

80

Yearly average growth in R&D expenditure

REVIEW QUESTIONS

21

panies that earned the highest shareholder returns also invested the most in
R&D. These results also hold within individual sectors in the economy.

CAUTIOUS OPTIMISM
Overall, capital markets reward companies that focus on long-term value
creation, and these companies help the economy and other stakeholders. It
is unfortunate but true, however, that managers are often under pressure to
achieve short-term results at the expense of long-term value creation. Many
succumb. In a recent survey of 401 executives, 55 percent of them said they
would delay or cancel a value-creating project to avoid missing the consensus analysts’ forecast for the current quarter’s earnings.5
The pressure to show short-term results often occurs when companies
start to mature and begin a transition from high to low growth. Investors
clamor for high growth. Managers are tempted to find ways to keep profits
growing in the short term while they try to stimulate longer-term growth.
Usually, the short-term efforts make achieving long-term growth even more
difficult, spawning a vicious cycle.
Perhaps no action was more disappointing and damaging than the wave
of accounting fraud that managers resorted to in the late 1990s and early
2000s to improve the appearance of their short-term results. Eventually,
fraudulent profits must be turned into real profits, so we wonder how these
managers thought they would ultimately generate enough real earnings to
cover the fraudulent ones.
Stock markets will always clamor for short-term results, just as coaches
push athletes to achieve a higher level of performance. That pressure will
always be there, and it is not all bad. It is up to managers to sort out the
trade-offs between short-term earnings and long-term value creation and be
courageous enough to act accordingly. Perhaps even more important, it is
up to corporate boards to investigate sufficiently and be active enough to
judge when managers are making the right trade-offs—and to protect them
when they choose to build long-term value.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Compare and contrast shareholder value maximization to stakeholder value maximization. Describe market forces that influence
the ideological tension between shareholder and stakeholder. How
does a shareholder define value?
5

J. Graham, C. Harvey, and S. Rajgopal, “The Economic Implications of Corporate Financial Reporting” ( Journal of Accounting and Economics, forthcoming).

22

WHY MAXIMIZE VALUE?

2. How can a short-term orientation, which focuses on metrics such as
ROI and EPS, negatively impact shareholder value?
3. Describe both the principal forces and the directions of the pressure
placed on companies to generate shareholder value.
4. Why should equity holders have the greatest decision-making power
in the firm?
5. Identify two examples where the capital markets misjudged corporate values. In your answer, emphasize the impact of executives
maintaining a short-term focus stressing industry and company fundamentals versus a long-term focus of corporate valuation.
6. Has the role of the institutional investor influenced managerial decision making over the past 25 years?
7. Critique the following statement: “Companies that focus on shareholder value create healthier companies.”
8. Describe the linkage between the long-run TRS of the market and
key macroeconomic variables, such as GDP growth, inflation, interest rates, and return on capital.
9. Describe one of the fundamental performance factors that explains
why U.S. companies are valued more highly that European or Asian
companies.

2
The Value Manager
Managing for value creation requires managers to break with the perspective that many of their peers typically use. Value managers are a special
breed: They focus on long-term cash flow rather than on quarter-to-quarter
earnings. They judge businesses by returns above opportunity costs, not by
size, prestige, and other emotional issues. Most important, they recognize
that managing for value means instilling the philosophy of value creation
throughout the organization.
To do so, value managers not only must set value as the company’s
overall strategic objective—that includes defining the portfolio of businesses, identifying major strategic initiatives, and determining value creation targets—but must ensure that the company’s day-to-day processes are
aligned with value creation. These processes include planning, performance management, compensation systems, and investor communications.
In this chapter, we describe how one manager transformed his company
into such a value management organization, thereby boosting cash flow,
earnings, and the recognition of shareholders. The case serves as an
overview of and framework for the application of more detailed valuation
approaches that we develop later.

PART 1: SITUATION
In 2004, EG Corporation (as we call it) had sales of about $10.7 billion (see
Exhibit 2.1 on p. 24). The company had three major divisions: Consumerco,
Foodco, and Woodco.
Consumerco manufactured consumer products, selling to groceries and
drugstores throughout the United States. Consumerco had built strong
brand names, and most of its product lines enjoyed a dominant market share.
23

24

THE VALUE MANAGER

Exhibit 2.1 EG Corporation Businesses
2004, $ million
EG Corporation
Sales: $10,650
1
EBITA :
$699

Consumerco
Sales: $6,300
1
EBITA : $435

Woodco
Sales: $2,550
1
EBITA : $75

Foodco
Sales: $1,500
1
EBITA : $120

Newsco
Sales: $300
1
EBITA : $45

Propco
Sales:
1
EBITA :

N/A
$15

Finco
Sales:
1
EBITA :

N/A
$9

1

EBITA = Earnings before interest, taxes, and amortization.

Woodco was formed through the gradual acquisition of eight smaller
companies, and was a midsize player in the furniture business. By 2005,
EG’s managers had begun to combine Woodco’s companies into a single
unit that they hoped would reduce operating costs and strengthen the company’s ability to control the business.
Foodco operated a contract food business and a chain of fast-food
restaurants. As of early 2005, Foodco was earning a profit, but faced formidable competition. Still, management believed that its operating approach
and EG’s Consumerco brand name (which Foodco used) would eventually
establish Foodco as a major industry player. For that reason, Foodco’s operations were under expansion.
EG also owned a few other small businesses: A property development
company (Propco); a small consumer finance company (Finco); and several
small newspapers (Newsco). These EG had acquired in the 1980s (though
no one was still at the company who could explain why). All were profitable,
though modestly so compared with EG’s three main divisions.
For the previous five years, EG’s overall financial performance had
been mediocre. Earnings had not kept pace with inflation. Return on capital was less than 10 percent. The company had failed to deliver on growth
and earnings commitments, and its stock price had lagged the market for
several years.
Analysts bemoaned EG’s lackluster performance, especially in view of
the strength of the Consumerco brand. They were also disenchanted with
the slow progress in building profits in other parts of the company. Some
analysts ventured that EG would make a good breakup play. EG’s board
and senior management were frustrated because they couldn’t convince the
market that EG should be more highly valued.

PART 2: RALPH AS CORPORATE STRATEGIST

25

In early 2005, Ralph Demsky became EG’s chairman and CEO. For 10
years, Ralph had been president of Consumerco. Ralph was familiar with
EG’s worrisome corporate predicament and was equally convinced that the
company could unleash great opportunities if it just focused its attention on
creating value. That, in fact, was why he was tapped to lead EG upon the retirement of the previous chairman and CEO.

PART 2: RALPH AS CORPORATE STRATEGIST
During his first week on the job, Ralph began to assess the value creation
opportunities at EG. He knew that quick action was necessary if he wanted
to convince the market that EG could be worth more than its current market
value. His first step was to create a task force that included EG’s chief financial officer, the heads of the major businesses, and himself, as chairman.
The team met twice a week to review progress and had an eight-week deadline to reach some conclusions.
Ralph had considered using a small team, perhaps consisting of himself, the chief financial officer, and several financial analysts. This would
have maintained secrecy and sped up the process. But he decided on a
larger group that would immediately tap into the best judgment of his senior managers, involve them in the improvements that they would play a
key role in executing, and educate them in a review process he planned to
make an annual event.
Ralph chose to investigate EG’s potential value along six lines of analysis. Together these would form a hexagon framework for value creation for
the company (see Exhibit 2.2).
The analysis would start with EG’s current market value and a comparison of that to EG’s intrinsic value based on its historical performance and
existing business plans. Next, the team would identify and value operating
improvement opportunities such as increasing margins, accelerating core
revenue growth, and improving capital efficiency. Third, it would decide
whether some businesses should be divested. Fourth, the team would identify potential acquisitions or the formation of new growth initiatives, and
estimate their impact on value. Fifth, the team would consider how value
might be increased through changing EG’s capital structure and enlisting
other means of financial engineering.

Current Valuation
Ralph started by reviewing EG’s stock performance. He knew that EG had
not performed particularly well for its shareholders in recent times and that

26

THE VALUE MANAGER

Exhibit 2.2 Corporate Strategy Framework

Perceptions
gap

Current
market
value

Maximum
opportunity

Total
potential
value

Value
as is

Operating
improvement

Financial
engineering
Value
with internal
improvements,
disposals, and
growth

Value with
internal
improvements

Disposal/
new owners

Value with
internal
improvements
and disposals

New growth
opportunities

operating returns had been disappointing. But Ralph wanted to be systematic in his review of the market’s perspective. His team set about examining
EG’s performance in the stock market, its underlying financial performance, how it had generated and invested its cash flow, and what the market was assuming about its future performance.
What he found was disturbing—and revealing: EG’s return to investors
had not only been below the overall market, but also below the returns for
comparable companies (see Exhibit 2.3). When he looked at EG’s valuation
relative to its peers, he was not surprised that his company was valued
lower than other companies in terms of the ratio of market value to the book
value of invested capital (see Exhibit 2.4 on p. 28).
He also noticed that between 1999 and 2004, when EG had made several
acquisitions to build the Woodco furniture businesses, there was a corresponding decline in EG’s share price (relative to comparable companies and
the market around the date of each acquisition). In fact, the decline in EG’s
total value was about equal to the dollar amount of the premiums over market price EG had paid to acquire the companies. Evidently, Ralph mused,
the stock market did not believe EG would add any value to the acquired
businesses. In fact, it viewed the acquisition premiums that EG had paid to
buy the firms as a damaging transfer of value—from EG investors to the
selling shareholders.

PART 2: RALPH AS CORPORATE STRATEGIST

27

Exhibit 2.3 EG Corporation: Shareholder Return versus
Comparable Companies

December 1999 = 100

Cumulative total returns (including dividends)

250

200
Comparables
S&P 500
150

EG Corporation
100

50

0
December
1999

December
2000

December
2001

December
2002

December
2003

December
2004

In fact, EG had not done anything notable with these companies as their
owner. There was no reason for them to be worth any more than their preacquisition value. And it did not matter that the deals had been carefully
structured and financed to avoid diluting EG’s earnings per share. The
market had seen through those cosmetics.
Looking next at the financial results of each of EG’s businesses, the
team noted that Consumerco had generated high, stable returns on invested capital (30+ percent) for the previous five years (see Exhibit 2.5 on
p. 28). However, the earnings of Consumerco were growing at no more than
the pace of inflation. Woodco, meanwhile, had suffered steadily declining
returns. Foodco’s earnings were growing, but returns on investment were
low ( because of high capital investment requirements in the restaurants).
All of these factors had conspired to depress overall EG returns on capital
and hamper profit growth.
EG’s cash flow map, based on the past five years, was of particular interest to Ralph (see Exhibit 2.6 on p. 29). It showed that while EG had been generating substantial discretionary (or free) cash flow in the Consumerco

28

THE VALUE MANAGER

Exhibit 2.4 EG Corporation: Comparative Current Valuation
Market-value-to-invested-capital, December 2004
New Moon

4.0
3.6

Universal Consumer
3.2

Henry’s

3.0

Smith & Smith
EG Corporation

1.9

Millennium

1.8

business, a large portion of that money had been sunk into Woodco and
Foodco. Relatively little had been reinvested in Consumerco. Moreover, little
of the cash had found its way back to EG’s shareholders. On a five-year basis,
EG had, in effect, been borrowing to pay dividends to its shareholders. Since
Ralph believed that shareholder value derived from the cash flow returns EG
could generate, he became increasingly convinced that EG had taken the
cash that Consumerco had generated—and squandered it on businesses that
might not generate an adequate return for shareholders.
Ralph next spent a day reading recent analysts’ reports. He then visited
EG’s major investors, and the leading analysts who followed EG’s stock.
Ralph was surprised at the favorable reception he received. Apparently, the
previous CEO rarely met individually with the analysts, and when he did,

Exhibit 2.5 EG Corporation: Business Unit Performance
ROIC
Average, 2000–2004
Consumerco

30%
20%

Newsco
Propco

10%

Foodco

9%

Woodco

Revenue growth
Annual growth rate, 2000–2004

6%

3%
6%
7%
15%
19%

PART 2: RALPH AS CORPORATE STRATEGIST

29

Exhibit 2.6 EG Corporation: Cumulative Cash Flow
Five years ending December 31, 2004
$ million
1,239

(462)

Financing of free cash flow
New debt
New shares issued
Less: dividends
Less: interest
New financing

(792)

165

33

3

750
156
(633)
(90)
183

(369)
(183)

Consumerco

Foodco

Woodco

Newsco

Propco

Finco

Corporate

Consolidated
free cash
flow

Gross
cash flow1
Gross
investment2

2,025

309

456

288

78

39

(354)

2,841

(786)

(771)

(1,248)

(123)

(75)

(6)

(15)

(3,024)

Free cash flow

1,239

(462)

(792)

165

3

33

(369)

(183)

1
Equals after-tax operating profits plus depreciation.
2

Equals capital expenditures, acquisitions, increases in working capital, and other assets.

never asked them candidly what they thought of the company. When Ralph
did ask, one of the analysts showed him why EG lacked credibility: The analysts had to continually revise downward their earnings forecasts for the
company (see Exhibit 2.7 on p. 30).
Ralph was not surprised to hear the analysts tell him that EG had been
complacent for the past five years. Or that EG had pursued new businesses
with little regard for the returns they would generate. Or that EG would remain an unattractive investment candidate unless someone took some action that demonstrated the company’s commitment to creating value for
shareholders. Ralph was not surprised, because he knew it was true.

EG’s “As Is” Value
The team’s next step was to assess the value of the EG portfolio, on the basis
of projected future cash flow. To do this, the team members developed cash
flow models for each business, based on projected sales growth, margins,
working capital, and capital spending needs. The finance staff, meanwhile,
developed estimates of the cost of capital for each division.

30

THE VALUE MANAGER

Exhibit 2.7 EG Corporation: Continuous Earnings Disappointments
$/share
Expected EPS

Realized EPS

5

$ per share

4

3

EPS 95

EPS 03

EPS 04

2003

2004

2
EPS 00

1
1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

When these data were assembled, the team ran two sets of discounted
cash flow valuations. These served as preliminary benchmarks. The first
was based on extrapolations of the previous three years’ operating results
for each business. These projections were used to estimate the value of each
EG business (as well as the cost of corporate headquarters activities and the
value of nonoperating investments). Exhibit 2.8 shows the value buildup
that the team used to compare the total value to EG’s market value.
From this, the team realized that the discounted cash flow value of the
company based on historical performance ($5.6 billion) was substantially
below EG’s value in the marketplace ($7.2 billion). They realized that unless
Foodco’s performance improved dramatically, Foodco would soon be worth
far less than the capital EG had invested in it over the past few years. They
also saw that more than 80 percent of EG’s value was represented by the
cash flow generated by Consumerco. Finally, they realized that corporate
headquarters costs, when viewed on a value basis, represented a 25 percent
drag on overall EG value.
These were disturbing conclusions, but Ralph asked the team to press
on. Next they estimated EG’s value—assuming that the performance

PART 2: RALPH AS CORPORATE STRATEGIST

31

Exhibit 2.8 EG Corporation: Value Based on Historical Extrapolation
DCF value
($ million)
Consumerco
Foodco
Woodco
Newsco
Propco
Finco
Corporate overhead
Total
Debt
Equity value
Stock market value
Value gap
Percent of stock market value

5,250
900
600
525
375
75
(1,275)
6,450
(900)
5,550
7,200
(1,650)
–23%

Invested
capital
($ million)

Value created/
(destroyed)
($ million)

2,100
900
900
360
420
165
0
4,845
(900)
3,945

3,150
–
(300)
165
(45)
(90)
(1,275)
1,605
–
1,605

estimates in the current business plans were achieved. The results, shown
in Exhibit 2.9, indicated that the total discounted cash flow (DCF) value of
EG based on its business plan was about 10 percent higher than its current
market value.
This seemed good. But Ralph knew that 10 percent was nothing to the
stock market. The market took for granted that EG would either improve its
performance or fall into the hands of someone who would. Recognizing

Exhibit 2.9 EG Corporation: Value Buildup Comparison

Historical extrapolation
($ million)
Consumerco
Foodco
Woodco
Newsco
Propco
Finco
Corporate overhead
Total
Debt
Equity value
Stock market value
Value gap
Percent of stock market value

5,250
900
600
525
375
75
(1,275)
6,450
(900)
5,550
7,200
(1,650)
–23%

Business plans
($ million)

Difference
(percent)

6,345
825
1,800
600
450
105
(1,275)
8,850
(900)
7,950
7,200
750
10%

21
(8)
200
14
20
40
0
37
43

32

THE VALUE MANAGER

that, Ralph decided that EG would need to come up with something dramatic enough to lift the value of his shareholders’ investments much faster
than the previous plan.
In thinking this through, Ralph realized that the current plan had problems. Consumerco’s plan would increase its value by about 20 percent,
which would have a large impact on EG. Foodco’s value, however, would actually decline (even though its plan involved substantial growth in the
number of outlets and overall sales and earnings).
To Ralph this meant only one thing—the returns on investment at
Foodco were too low. Foodco management was focusing more on growth
than on returns. In contrast, the Woodco consolidation looked set to improve the value of the furniture businesses dramatically, while the newspaper, finance, and property businesses would improve somewhat too.
At this stage, Ralph decided that Consumerco would have to perform
even better, given what it needed to contribute to the company. Foodco,
meanwhile, would need to revamp its strategy to make sure that it built
value, not simply bulk. And Woodco’s consolidation of its companies, already underway, was far more important than he had thought—and would
need to succeed to maintain EG’s overall value. The bottom line was that
EG would need to run hard just to maintain shareholder value, and even
harder to exceed it. Any missteps could cause the share price to collapse.

EG’s Potential Value with Internal Improvements
After looking at EG’s current value, Ralph’s team tried to assess how more
aggressive plans and strategies might help boost the value of the business.
The managers first conducted a sensitivity analysis, estimating how the
value would be affected by an increase in sales growth of 1 percent, then a
rise in margins by a percentage point, and finally, the reduction of capital
intensity. The results appear in Exhibit 2.10.
Foodco was most sensitive to reductions in capital intensity and increases in margins. If Foodco grew faster at current margins and capital intensity, in fact, its value would actually decrease. Growth would be
unprofitable, because Foodco earned a rate of return on invested capital less
than its cost of capital. Woodco, meanwhile, would be strengthened most by
improvements in its operating margin (which would come with the consolidation of its companies). Consumerco was responsive to sales growth: With
its high margins and outstanding capital utilization, each dollar of sales
would generate large profits and cash flows.
The team next compared the EG businesses with similar companies, in
terms of overall performance as well as relative costs, productivity, and investment. This analysis, coupled with the financial comparisons, convinced
Ralph and his team that EG could perform at much higher levels.

PART 2: RALPH AS CORPORATE STRATEGIST

33

Exhibit 2.10 EG Corporation: Impact on Value of Changes in
Key Operating Measures
percent
Foodco

Woodco

Consumerco
14

10

5

5

Operating Invested
margin
capital

Growth

6

1

0

–2
Growth

4

Operating Invested
margin
capital

Growth

Operating Invested
margin
capital

Note: Assumed changes in key operating measures included a 1% increase in sales growth rate, a 1 percentage point increase in operating
margin, and a 1 percentage point decrease in invested capital.

Consumerco seemed to have room to increase revenue significantly and
earn even higher margins:
• The team discovered that Consumerco had been restraining R&D
and advertising spending to generate cash for EG’s diversification efforts and to buffer poor performance in other parts of EG’s portfolio.
Ralph’s team believed the answer lay in boosting short-term spending. This would lead to higher sales volumes in existing EG products
and encourage the introduction of additional high-margin products
in the future.
• Despite Consumerco’s dominant position in its market categories,
Consumerco’s prices were actually lower than less popular brands.
The study revealed that most category leaders were able to charge
higher prices. The team estimated that the value created by price increases would more than offset any losses in volume.
• The team discovered that Consumerco’s sales force was less than half
as productive as sales forces at other companies that sold through the
same channels. Ralph had suspected this, and was sure that the productivity of the sales force could be improved.
• The team determined that Consumerco had room to cut costs, particularly in terms of purchases and inventory management. In fact, the
cost of sales could easily be reduced by one percentage point.
When the team factored in these possibilities, they found that Consumerco’s value could be increased conservatively by 25 percent, as shown
in Exhibit 2.11 on page 34.

34

THE VALUE MANAGER

Exhibit 2.11 EG Corporation: Value of Consumerco Internal Improvements
$ million
Value per business plan

6,345

Increase R&D yield 25%

195

Boost sales growth 5% for 3 years with aggressive ad spending
Raise prices 3% real (suffer 3% volume decline)
Reduce cost of sales force

435
450
150

Reduce cost of sales by 1 percentage point

345

Value with improvements

7,920

Woodco could also dramatically improve its performance far beyond the
earlier plan. It just needed to be able to perform at the levels of other top
furniture companies. This would likely require Woodco to focus less on
growth and more on higher margins. To do this, Woodco would need to
build better management information and control systems, and stick to its
familiar mass-market products, instead of striking out into new upmarket
furnishings, as it once planned.
Foodco looked as if it would continue as a poor performer. The industry
was extremely competitive. A few large players were earning respectable returns, but even their returns were starting to decline. After further study,
the Consumerco brand, which Foodco used, was found to be of little value
in building the business. Foodco would be unable to develop significant
scale economies, at least in the near future. To make matters worse, Foodco
had a voracious appetite for capital to build facilities. But it was not generating a return on new investment sufficient to cover the opportunity cost of
the capital. The team decided that Foodco should trim operations back (to
its profitable locations) and choose more conservative growth targets.
Similar reviews were carried out for the smaller EG businesses. The
team also examined EG’s corporate overhead and found opportunities to
reduce costs substantially. EG’s corporate staff had grown and the divisions
had also added staff to the point where they were functioning largely as
freestanding operations. Ralph believed that 50 percent of the corporate
costs could be eliminated.
Ralph placed the potential internal value of EG’s businesses at about
$10.9 billion, which would be 50 percent above its current market value (see

PART 2: RALPH AS CORPORATE STRATEGIST

35

Exhibit 2.12 EG Corporation: Potential Value versus Plan Value
Historical
extrapolation
($ million)
Consumerco
Foodco
Woodco
Newsco
Propco
Finco
Corporate overhead
Total
Debt
Equity value
Stock market value
Value gap
Percent of stock market value

Business
plans
($ million)

Potential
value
($ million)

6,345
825
1,800
600
450
105
(1,275)
8,850
(900)
7,950
7,200
750)
10%

7,920
900
2,400
645
480
105
(675)
11,775
(900)
10,875
7,200
3,675
51%

5,250
900
600
525
375
75
(1,275)
6,450
(900)
5,550
7,200
(1,650)
–23%

Improvement
(percent)
25
9
33
8
7
0
NA
33
37

Exhibit 2.12). This was before any incremental value that might accrue
through the sale of EG businesses.
Ralph and his team were beginning to feel better about their chances
for turning EG into a high-performance company. They were eager to get
to the next step: estimating the value of EG’s businesses to new owners
through a sale or spin-off.

EG’s Potential Value to Other Owners
If any of EG’s businesses were worth more to someone else than to EG,
Ralph realized he should gladly sell them. The buyer might be someone
who could create more value from the business through synergies with
other businesses or better operational management, or someone who was
merely overenthusiastic about the prospects of the business and was ready
to buy. In EG’s case, Ralph suspected he would find more buyers who could
create value (due to synergies or stronger management skills in the relevant
industry) than overenthusiastic buyers.
To approximate a selling price, Ralph’s team analyzed the external
value of EG’s businesses under four scenarios: sale to a strategic buyer (another company that could realize operating and strategic synergies); a flotation or spin-off; a leveraged buyout by management or a third party; and a
liquidation (see Exhibit 2.13 on p. 36).
The team started by determining how much the EG businesses would
trade for in the market if spun off as independent companies. To estimate

36

THE VALUE MANAGER

Exhibit 2.13 EG Corporation: Comparison of External Value
Estimates by Business

Consumerco
Foodco
Woodco
Propco
Finco
Newsco
Total
Debt
Equity value
Taxes and costs
Net proceeds

Strategic buyer
($ million)

Spin-off
($ million)

LBO
($ million)

Liquidation
($ million)

Highest value
($ million)

9,750
1,050
465
525
105
570

6,000
840
165
N/A
75
420

7,500
870
N/A
N/A
N/A
540

N/A
780
75
390
150
N/A

9,750
1,050
465
525
150
570
12,510
(900)
11,610
3,000
8,610

these values, the team identified a set of publicly traded companies comparable to each EG business. They used current stock market valuation data
(e.g., enterprise value-to-EBITA [earnings before interest, taxes, amortization], market-to-book ratios) to estimate the value of the EG businesses as
freestanding entities.
To their disappointment, they found that a simple breakup into separate, publicly traded companies would not, at current market prices, provide
any gain overall for EG shareholders. Nor did estimates of the value of the
businesses as leveraged-buyout candidates suggest that EG as a whole
would be worth more than in parts (especially after taking into account the
taxes EG would have to pay on the sale of the units). To be sure, the Consumerco business, with its strong, stable cash flow was a natural buyout
candidate, but the other businesses were not.
The team then considered the complete or partial liquidation of the
businesses. Of the three larger EG businesses, this only made sense for
Foodco, and this only because of its real estate holdings: The restaurant
property could be sold off piecemeal; the Foodco restaurant division subsequently shut down. But although a few of the restaurants were worth more
as real estate, the team soon determined that Foodco was worth more as a
going concern than in liquidation.
EG’s consumer finance company was a candidate, however. Consumer
finance had become so competitive that the spread between borrowing costs
and the rates earned on new loans did not cover operating costs. The team
discovered that the existing loan portfolio might be sold for more than the
entire business was worth. In effect, each year’s new business was dissipat-

PART 2: RALPH AS CORPORATE STRATEGIST

37

ing some of the value inherent in the existing loan portfolio. The team was
also sure that it would be relatively easy to sell the portfolio to other financial companies and exit the business entirely.
Ralph reviewed the team’s findings and finally concluded that Consumerco might be worth much more in the hands of another owner than it
was now worth to EG. Indeed, to a buyer the opportunities for improvement were plentiful. A merger could offer certain cost savings. The sales
forces could be combined and much of Consumerco’s direct sales force
eliminated. Potential savings could also be realized if Consumerco were
merged into an existing management structure at another consumer products company.
In addition to cost savings, an acquirer might inject vigorous marketing
expertise into the business, while ramping up the development of new
products. Consumerco had grown a bit lazy, thanks to its dominant and essentially unchallenged brand. New energy would undoubtedly bring even
richer returns.
All these factors together suggested that Consumerco might be worth
more than $9.7 billion to a strategic buyer. This price was much more than
its current worth (about $6.3 billion), and even more than Ralph’s team believed they could augment its value ($7.9 billion). The implication was clear:
Since Consumerco was worth so much more to someone else, and since it
was a large part of EG’s value, EG itself was at risk of a hostile takeover.
Other EG businesses might attract buyers as well. The team believed
that Foodco could attract a restaurant company that could either accelerate
Foodco’s profitability through better management, or through conversion
of the Foodco sites to its own brand. Because Foodco did not fit into EG’s
larger plans, the team tagged it as a prime sale candidate.
Woodco, meanwhile, might be sold to a company that bought and improved smaller furniture firms. But the team decided that it made little
sense to sell Woodco at the present moment—in the midst of the consolidation—when potential buyers might be concerned that the business could
fall apart. If the consolidation was successful, EG could sell Woodco for a
much higher price in 12 to 18 months. Then again, mused Ralph, if Woodco
were performing well, he might be convinced to keep it as the base for making additional furniture company acquisitions.

New Growth Opportunities
Ralph liked the way the analysis was coming together. The big missing
piece, however, was growth. For investors to be excited about EG, there had
to be a credible plan for long-term growth. Where could it be?
Ralph had often wondered why there was little discussion about
incubating new businesses at Consumerco, nor such radical moves as large

38

THE VALUE MANAGER

acquisitions. A quick analysis showed Ralph that if he could find opportunities that generated $1.5 billion to $3 billion in sales, he could increase
the market value of Consumerco by $2.4 billion or more. So where was the
big idea? Global expansion? New retail services? Direct sales?
Ralph knew that EG’s restructuring was his first priority. But he insisted on keeping long-term potential at the top of everyone’s mind. As the
restructuring analysis continued, Ralph insisted that all the summary
charts display the long-term growth imperatives prominently alongside the
short-term targets. He was willing to wait nine months while the restructuring was under way, but then he wanted to act on growth.

Potential Value of Financial Engineering
Ralph also urged his CFO to develop an aggressive plan to take advantage of
the tax advantages of debt financing. EG had had a policy of maintaining an
AA bond rating from Standard & Poor’s. EG prided itself as a strong investment-grade company, but Ralph knew that many companies had taken on
much higher debt levels and performed equally well. In fact, by taking on
debt, these companies were forced to think harder about additional ways to
generate cash flow. It also forced them to be smarter about what they
needed in terms of investment requirements and fixed expenses.
EG had sizable and stable free cash flows that could support much
higher debt. The Consumerco business, which generated the bulk of
the cash, was recession-resistant. Ralph also knew that he did not
need much reserve financial capacity given the relative maturity of EG’s
core business and its limited need for capital. He also believed that EG
could tap funding for a major expansion or acquisition, if it made economic sense.
Indeed, EG could carry a lot more debt, and that debt level could rise
along with an improvement in EG’s businesses. At a minimum, EG could
raise $1.5 billion in new debt in the next six months, Ralph figured, and use
the proceeds to repurchase shares or pay a special dividend. This debt
would provide a more tax-efficient capital structure for EG, which would be
worth about $600 million in present value to EG’s shareholders.
Several bankers had approached Ralph suggesting complex financial
transactions, including securitization and leasing. After reviewing some of
these with his CFO, however, Ralph was convinced that for an investmentgrade company like EG, with little in the way of fungible assets (e.g., airplanes, gas turbine generators, or real estate), these transactions were
unlikely to create real shareholder value. He was concerned that they would
also distract management from improving the operating performance of the
company. So he decided not to put any more time into evaluating those
transactions.

PART 3: RALPH AS VALUE MANAGER

39

EG’s New Corporate Strategy
Ralph’s team had analyzed EG’s value from multiple perspectives. Now
they were ready to put them into action, business unit by business unit:
Business

Actions

Consumerco

Increase prices
Invest in advertising
Invest in new products
Rationalize sales force
Build marketing talent and skills
Reduce manufacturing costs

Foodco

Sell to strategic buyer

Woodco

Accelerate consolidation
Focus on basic furniture market rather than expanding
in to upscale segments

Propco

Sell

Finco

Sell loan portfolio
Wind down other activities

Newsco

Sell

Corporate

Decentralize more activities
Reduce costs by 50 percent

New growth opportunities

To be determined

Financing

Increase debt by $1.5 billion to target BBB rating

If Ralph could successfully execute his plan, it would produce a large
gain for EG shareholders. Exhibit 2.14 on page 40 shows the sources of the
gain, which would more than double EG’s present value. Ralph and his
team were confident, and since they could take immediate action, they expected to see quick results.

PART 3: RALPH AS VALUE MANAGER
When EG announced its new corporate strategy, its share price jumped immediately. Then, as it made progress in the first six months of 2005, EG’s
shares increased 40 percent when the overall stock market was flat. The analysts who followed EG stopped talking about takeovers and applauded the
transformation of the company.

40

THE VALUE MANAGER

Exhibit 2.14 EG Corporation: Value Created through Restructuring
Historical extrapolation
($ million)
Consumerco
Foodco
Woodco
Newsco
Propco
Finco
Corporate overhead
Debt tax benefit
Total
Debt
Equity value
New growth opportunities
Equity value with new
growth opportunities

5,250
900
600
525
375
75
(1,275)
NA
6,450
(900)
5,550
0
5,550

New corporate strategy
($ million)

Difference
(percent)

8,700
1,050
2,400
570
480
135
(675)
600
13,260
(900)
12,360
2,400+
14,760

66 operating improvements
17 sale
300 consolidation/sale
9 sale
28 sale
80 liquidation
47 cuts
NA
106
122
166

Needless to say, Ralph and his team were pleased with the results.
Ralph regretted having to reduce the corporate staff and sell some of EG’s
businesses. But he took some comfort knowing that he did it in a more orderly and humane way than an outsider would have.
Despite the successes, Ralph knew he had a lot more work ahead to see
the restructuring plan through to completion. He also recognized that he
needed to orient the company towards managing for value on a permanent
basis. Before management became complacent again, he wanted to build on
the fragile momentum that had been established.
Ralph planned to take five further steps to build EG’s ability to
manage value:
1. Focus planning and investment analysis on value creation.
2. Develop value-oriented targets and performance measurement
systems.
3. Restructure EG’s compensation system to emphasize the creation of
shareholder value.
4. Communicate EG’s plans, in terms of value creation, more clearly
and consistently to investors and analysts.
5. Reshape the role of the company’s CFO.

Put Value into Planning and Investment Analysis
Ralph realized that EG was not good at stressing value creation at the corporate and business-unit levels. To change that, Ralph made value creation

PART 3: RALPH AS VALUE MANAGER

41

the responsibility of all senior managers. Value analysis of each of the businesses would be required; in fact, executives would use the hexagon valuecreation framework on an annual basis.
At the business level, EG’s new focus on value would require some
changes, too. Management in the business units would need to think differently about their operations. They would need to focus on what was driving
the value of their businesses—whether it was volume growth, margins, or
capital utilization.
What would matter in the future was not growth in earnings, but
growth in value. Sometimes this would mean dispensing with ambitious
growth targets. At other times, it would mean accepting lower earnings
when investments in research and development or advertising made economic sense.
EG had been using discounted cash flow analysis to determine capital
spending for at least five years. But Ralph saw two problems in this. First,
capital spending was not linked tightly enough to the strategic and operating plans for the businesses. Because of this, capital spending proposals
were out of context and difficult to evaluate. Ralph intended to tie capital
spending closely to strategic and operating plans to ensure that its evaluation was realistic and fact-based. He would also ensure that the finance
staff developed appropriate hurdle rates. These would differ by division
and reflect the particular opportunity cost of capital.
Second, Ralph knew that one of EG’s biggest failures had been in the
evaluation of its acquisitions. EG paid too much for the Woodco acquisitions
in the 1980s, although the accounting earnings and dilution figures looked
good in the first year or two afterward. To Ralph, it was really quite simple:
The cash flow value to EG’s shareholders had to be higher than the price EG
would have to pay, or Ralph would not make the acquisition.
Ralph also believed that EG could assess value much more systematically than in the past. First, EG management would evaluate the target’s
business on an “as is” basis, just as the team had done for EG. Next, management would use the restructuring hexagon approach to identify improvements that EG management could make to the value of the company,
without any EG synergies.
Finally, EG would evaluate the potential for hiking the value of the acquisition through synergies with other EG businesses. Finally, EG management would think about the strategic options the acquisition could create: It
might give EG an option on a new technology in one of its businesses or access to a new market, both of which could have substantial value under the
right conditions. These would be difficult to evaluate and value, but would
be important.
With this information, EG would know how much to pay and what to
do with the business after the acquisition. EG would also know the value of
the acquisition to other potential buyers, avoiding fruitless bidding contests

42

THE VALUE MANAGER

or the chances of paying too much. (Why give all the potential value of the
acquisition to the selling shareholders, when EG will be doing all the work
to get there?)

Develop Value-Oriented Targets and Performance Metrics
Ralph knew that his managers needed clear targets and performance metrics to track their progress. Although the stock price was the ultimate metric, something more concrete, particularly to his business unit managers,
was required.
During the corporate strategy analysis, Ralph learned what drives a
business’s value: its long-term revenue growth potential and its return on
invested capital (relative to its cost of capital). Return on invested capital
(ROIC) is after-tax operating profits divided by sum of working capital and
fixed assets. It was obvious to Ralph that these measures—revenue growth
and ROIC—were the standards that EG could use to set financial and performance targets at both the business unit and corporate level.
But to make this work, it would be necessary to tailor the growth and
ROIC targets to the particular characteristics of the business unit. Consumerco had to emphasize revenue growth. Woodco needed to focus on improving its return on capital. Each business had to be understood before
setting its targets.
Ralph recognized that ROIC and other accounting-based measures
could be manipulated in the short term so as to obscure performance.
ROIC does not reveal whether a business is earning its ROIC, for example,
through high prices and declining market share, or stable prices and growing share.
As CEO, Ralph wanted to make sure that business unit leaders focused
on long-term value creation. He did not want them pumping up ROIC to
look good for one or two years at the expense of the longer term. So he decided that ROIC targets and performance measurement needed to include
key operating and strategic drivers, which he thought of as measures of the
“health” of the business. On the sales and marketing side, he wanted to set
targets for pricing, market share, and new products. On the operating side,
he wanted measures such as unit cost, quality, and the ability to meet delivery deadlines.
This was really an integrated system of target setting and performance
measurement that combined financial information with health indicators
and external market data. Ralph’s accounting group, which was accustomed to dealing with accounting results alone, needed to adopt a new
mind-set. The accounting group resisted. But Ralph showed them the benefits of integrating financial results with health measures.

PART 3: RALPH AS VALUE MANAGER

43

Overhaul Business Performance Reviews
Having been at EG for many years, Ralph knew that the monthly and
quarterly business unit performance reviews also needed an overhaul. He
identified two issues. First, they focused entirely on short-term profits
without regard to the drivers of profit. If a business unit hit its budget,
there was little discussion of whether the budgeted results were met by
true operational improvement or by shortsighted actions that would create hurdles later. Second, corporate management was ill-prepared for the
reviews. Corporate executives were not knowledgeable enough about the
business units to engage in constructive discussions about the causes of
good or bad performance and to work with the business unit managers to
identify solutions to problems.
Ralph decided to structure the business unit performance reviews
around the new integrated performance measurement system that he had
tasked his CFO to develop. He wanted to focus the reviews on the underlying drivers of results, good and bad. He also resolved that he and his CFO
would become smarter about the strategic and operating issues and opportunities for each unit so that they could constructively engage the business
unit leaders. He figured that if he and the rest of the corporate executive
team could not add value to a particular unit, then EG shouldn’t own it.

Tie Compensation to Value Creation
Ralph believed that compensation was an important way to motivate employees to focus on value creation. However, EG’s system had many flaws.
Like many company pay systems, bonuses were calculated based on formulas linked to short-term accounting profits. Executives also received
stock options, which helped align their interests with the shareholders,
but only loosely.
It was obvious to Ralph that he needed to link EG’s compensation system to the new integrated-performance measurement system he was planning. That would lead managers to focus on the “health” of EG by
highlighting performance against measures that would drive the long-term
value creation of EG, not just short-term financial performance. He was
wary, however, about using rigid formulas. He preferred a more subjective
approach that allowed senior management to award bonus compensation
based on an overall performance assessment, rather than mechanically
tying it to a small number of measures. He wanted to be able to reward hard
work and creativity, not just luck. Finally, he wanted to defer bonus payouts,
even after retirement, so that managers would not have incentives to pump
up EG’s short-term performance just before they retired or left EG. He
knew this would be difficult to implement, but thought it worth the effort.

44

THE VALUE MANAGER

Ralph decided to keep the stock-option program, but decided to make
substantial changes to it. Most important, he changed the exercise price on
options from a fixed price to a price indexed to a set of peer companies. That
way, the value of the stock options would better reflect EG’s own performance, rather than the overall stock market or its industry.

Develop Investor Communications Strategy
Ralph planned to build the company’s credibility with Wall Street analysts
and investors through some hard work. He wanted to know exactly what
investors and analysts thought of EG’s performance and prospects.
First, this would help him give the market the information it needed to
evaluate the company properly. Second, Ralph knew that the market was
smart. It could tell him a lot about the direction of his industry and his competitors. Ralph wasn’t trying to fool the market about EG. He would treat
the investors and the investing community with the same care that he
showed EG’s customers and employees. Had previous management taken
the time to understand what the market was saying about EG, the company
might have avoided the difficult position in which it found itself.
Previously, EG’s investor communications had focused on accounting
earnings. But Ralph learned that investors and analysts were more interested in the factors that drove earnings than in the earnings themselves.
Earning per share driven by stock repurchases would not be viewed as favorably as increased earnings driven by revenue growth through greater
market share. Accordingly, Ralph decided to use his investor conference
calls and written materials to explain what drove EG’s results, so that investors would understand them.

Reshape CFO’s Role
Ralph also realized that the role of the CFO needed revising. Managing
value takes a lot of work—especially when business strategy and financial
strategy are so tightly interlinked. Ralph needed a strong executive to
help him.
With the retirement of his current CFO, Ralph was free to create a position that would blend corporate strategy and financial responsibilities. The
officer would act as a bridge between the strategic/operating focus of the
division heads and the financial requirements of the corporation and its investors. The CFO would take the lead in developing a value-creating corporate strategy for EG, while working with Ralph and the division heads to
build a value-management capability throughout the organization.
The CFO would also be responsible for managing the normal financial
affairs and financial reporting of the corporation, in particular the new in-

REVIEW QUESTIONS

45

tegrated performance-management system. But his or her success would be
measured mainly by how well EG made the transition to a corporation that
managed value in a superior way.
At the end of the first year, the new CFO’s responsibilities would include helping deliver a first-draft corporate strategy and a clearly articulated supporting financial strategy. The CFO would also have trained
leading managers to submit plans and proposals in terms of value creation. Investors and securities analysts would also have received a much
clearer understanding of EG’s strategy and value. Longer term, the CFO’s
success would be measured by the superior returns to shareholders,
the value-creating expansion activities of the company, and the overall
establishment of EG in the financial community as a leading-edge, valuemanaging company.
Ralph expected to spend as long as two years making the crossing—
recruiting the new CFO; evaluating all major decisions in terms of impact
on value; redesigning the compensation system for senior management;
communicating more clearly and consistently with the stock market. All
this would help ensure that EG produced outstanding value for shareholders. Moreover, by following this integrated approach, EG would more easily
be able to set corporate priorities. Why? Because all major decisions would
refer to the common benchmark: their impact on the value of the company.

SUMMARY
The ability to manage value is an essential part of developing sound corporate and business strategies. As the EG Corporation case shows, managing
value is not a mysterious process. Valuation techniques can be complex in
their details, but they are relatively straightforward in their application. In
subsequent chapters we expand on the approaches needed to carry out such
corporate value management.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What are two important aspects of becoming value oriented? Apply
and discuss the restructuring hexagon to Consumerco. What conclusions might be drawn from the hexagon value analysis to the specific
decision alternatives for the Consumerco division?
2. Outline Ralph’s five steps to rebuild EG’s ability to manage value.
3. Identify how divisional relationships and performance gave rise to
the concerns the financial markets had about EG Corp.

46

THE VALUE MANAGER

4. Identify and define the three steps necessary to develop a value management philosophy.
5. Discuss the value sensitivity analysis of Foodco, Woodco, and Consumerco. What are the strategy implications for each unit?
6. Discuss the different options for divesting business units. What are
the advantages and disadvantages of each option?

3
Fundamental Principles
of Value Creation
This chapter explains the fundamental principles of value and value creation. The first part of the chapter illustrates the basics of value creation
with the story of Fred’s Hardware. The second part develops the model of
value and value creation more formally.

FRED’S HARDWARE
Fred’s business undergoes a remarkable transformation. Fred starts out as
the owner of a small chain of hardware stores. Then he develops the idea of
Fred’s Superhardware and converts his stores to the new concept. To expand, Fred takes his company public to raise additional capital. His success
leads Fred to develop additional retail concepts, such as Fred’s Furniture
and Fred’s Garden Supplies. In the end, Fred is faced with the complexity of
managing a retail conglomerate.

The Early Years
In the early years, Fred owned a small chain of hardware stores. Naive in
the ways of finance, he asked us to help him assess his company’s financial
performance. To keep things simple, we told Fred that he should measure
the return on invested capital (after-tax operating profits divided by the
capital invested in working capital and property, plant, and equipment) and
compare it with what he could earn if he invested his capital elsewhere, for
example in the stock market.
Fred calculated his return on invested capital as 18 percent. We suggested that he could earn 10 percent by investing his capital in stocks with
47

48

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF VALUE CREATION

Exhibit 3.1 Fred’s Hardware: 2000 Economic Profit

Entire company
Without low return store

ROIC
(percent)
18
19

1

WACC
(percent)
10
10

Spread
(percent)
8
9

Invested
capital
($ thousand)
10,000
8,000

Economic
profit
($ thousand)
800
720

1

Weighted average cost of capital.

similar risk, so Fred was satisfied, since his investment was earning more
than he could earn elsewhere.
Fred had an idea for increasing his company’s overall return on invested capital (ROIC). One of his stores was earning only a 14 percent return, and if he closed it, he could increase his average return on invested
capital. We told him that what he should care about is not the ROIC itself,
but the combination of ROIC (relative to the cost of capital) and the amount
of capital invested, expressed as economic profit. We showed him a simple
example (see Exhibit 3.1).
Economic profit can be expressed as the spread between ROIC and the
cost of capital, multiplied by the amount of invested capital. In Fred’s case,
economic profit was $800,000. If he closed down his low-returning store, average ROIC would increase, but economic profit would decline. Even
though the store earned a lower ROIC than the other stores, it still earned
more than its cost of capital.
The objective is to maximize economic profit over the long term, not
ROIC. Consider an extreme example: Most investors would prefer to earn a
20 percent return on $1 million of capital, rather than a 50 percent return on
$1,000 of capital, even though the rate of return on the smaller capital is
higher. Fred was convinced. He set out to maximize economic profit.
A few weeks later, Fred came back perplexed. His sister Sally, who
owned Sally’s Stores, had just told him about her aggressive expansion
plans. As Exhibit 3.2 shows, Sally’s operating profit was projected to grow
much faster than Fred’s. Fred did not like the idea of his sister bettering him.
Wait a minute, we said. How is Sally getting all that growth? What
about her economic profit? Fred went back to check and came back with Exhibit 3.3. Indeed, Sally was achieving her growth by investing lots of capital,
not through increased efficiency. Her company’s ROIC was declining significantly, leading to a decrease in economic profit despite the growth in operating profit. Fred was relieved and went off to explain it all to Sally.

Growing Fred’s Business
For many years, Fred was happy with the economic profit framework.
Then one day he reappeared. He wanted to develop a new business called

FRED’S HARDWARE

49

Exhibit 3.2 Fred and Sally: Projected Operating Profit
After-tax operating profits
($ thousand)
5,000

Sally

4,000

Fred

3,000
2,000
1,000
0
2000

2002

2004

Fred’s Superhardware. But when he looked at the projected results (he
now had a financial analysis department), he found that economic profit
would decline in the next few years if he converted his stores to the new
format because of the new capital investment required (see Exhibit 3.4 on
p. 50). After four years, economic profit would be greater, but he did not
know how to trade off the short-term decline in economic profit against the
long-term improvement.
We said, yes, Fred, you are right. You need some more sophisticated
financial tools. At first, we were trying to keep it simple. But now Fred
was faced with a decision where the straightforward rule of increasing or

Exhibit 3.3 Fred and Sally: Projected Economic Profit
ROIC
(percent)
20

Economic profit
($ thousand)
2,000
Fred

Sally

10

1,000
500

5

Sally

0

0
2000

Fred
1,500

15

2002

2004

2000

2002

2004

50

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF VALUE CREATION

Exhibit 3.4 Fred’s New Concept
Economic profit
($ thousand)
5,000

Convert to
new format

4,000

Old format

3,000
2,000
1,000
0
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

maximizing economic profit would not offer a clear answer. He needed to
aggregate multiple years into a single number to compare the different
strategies. One method is to use discounted cash flow (DCF), also known as
present value.
Fred said that he knew about DCF. You forecast the future cash flow of
a company and discount it to the present at the same opportunity cost of
capital discussed earlier. We helped Fred apply DCF to his new store concept. We discounted the projected cash flows at 10 percent. The DCF value
of his company without the new concept was $53 million. With the new concept, the DCF value increased to $62 million. He was excited that he could
pursue the new concept.
But, said Fred, what is confusing to me is when do I use economic profit
and when do I use DCF? And why are they not the same?
Good question, we said. In fact, they are the same. Let’s discount the future economic profit at the same cost of capital. If we add the discounted
economic profit to the amount of capital you have invested today, you get
exactly the same result as the DCF approach, to the penny (see Exhibit 3.5).

Fred Goes Public
Using DCF, Fred had a way of making important long-term strategic decisions. His Superhardware concept was successful and he came to us again
with great ambitions. I need to build more stores, he said, so I need more
capital. Besides, I want to provide an opportunity for some of my employees

FRED’S HARDWARE

51

Exhibit 3.5 Equivalence of DCF and Economic Profit Valuation1
$ thousand
Economic profit valuation
39,691

61,911

Discounted
at 10%

22,220

Current
invested
capital

Projected economic profit

441

772

924

2004

2005

2006

3,393

3,508

2007

2008

808

1,086

4,201

4,832

2009

2010

2,524

3,121

Total
PV of
economic value
profit

Discounted cash flow valuation
Projected cash flow

61,911
Discounted
at 10%

–2,339

DCF
value

–8,281
–12,110

1

Developed in detail in Chapter 5.

to become owners. So I have decided to take my company public. What is
going to happen?
Well, we said, now you need to learn the distinction between financial
markets and real markets and how they relate to each other. We need to
show you that good performance in one market does not necessarily translate to good performance in another.
Until now, we have been talking about the real market: How much profit
and cash flow are you earning relative to the investments you have to make?
Are you maximizing your economic profit and cash flow? In the real market, your decision rule is simple: Choose strategies or make operational decisions that maximize the present value of future cash flow or future
economic profit.
When a company enters the financial (or capital) market, the real market decision rules are essentially unchanged, but life becomes more complicated because management must simultaneously deal with outside
investors and analysts.
When a company goes public, it sells shares to a wide range of investors who can trade those shares in an organized market. The trading

52

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF VALUE CREATION

activity between investors and speculators sets a market price for those
shares. Each investor determines a value for the shares and trades based
on whether the current price is above or below that estimate of the intrinsic value.
This intrinsic value is based on the company’s ability to generate cash
flow in the future. This means, essentially, that investors are paying for the
performance that they expect the company to achieve in the future, not
what the company has done in the past and certainly not the cost of the assets in the company.
Fred then asked, “How much will we get when we sell our shares?”
Assume that the market’s overall assessment of your company’s future
performance is similar to how you think your company will do. So the
first step is to forecast your company’s performance and discount the future expected cash flows. Based on this analysis, the intrinsic value is $20
per share.
That is interesting, Fred said, because the amount of capital I have invested is only $7 per share. We responded, that means the market should be
willing to pay you a premium of $13 over the invested capital for the future
economic profit that you will earn. But if they pay me this premium up
front, he asked, how will the investors make any money?
They may not, we said. Let us start by examining what happens if your
company performs exactly as originally expected. The value of the company in five years will be $32 per share, if you perform exactly as anticipated, expectations beyond five years do not change, and investors
continue to expect a 10 percent return from alternative investments. Assume that you have not paid any dividends. So an investor who bought
stock for $20 per share today could sell the share for $32 in five years. The
annualized return would be 10 percent, exactly the same as the discount
rate we used to discount your future performance. The interesting thing is
that as long as you perform as expected, the return for your shareholders
will be equal to their opportunity cost (assuming the opportunity cost
does not change).
If, on the other hand, you did better than expected, your shareholders
would earn more than 10 percent. If you did worse than expected, your
shareholders would earn less than 10 percent.
Consider the following analogy. Investing in the stock market is like
betting on a sports team, but with a point spread (a point spread is the expected difference in points at the end of the game). When a spread exists,
you cannot just pick the team you expect to win. You have to beat the spread
(if you pick the favorite team, the favorite has to win by more points than
the spread for the bet to pay off). Thus, picking a good team is not enough.
The team has to beat expectations!
So, Fred said, the return that my investors earn is driven not by the performance of my company but by the performance relative to expectations.

FRED’S HARDWARE

53

Exactly, we said. Does that mean, asked Fred, that I have to manage my
company’s performance in the real markets and the financial markets at the
same time? Yes, we said. If you create lots of value in the real market ( by
earning more than your cost of capital and growing fast) but do not do as
well as investors expect, they will be disappointed. Your task as manager is
to maximize the intrinsic value of the company and to properly manage the
expectations of the financial market.
Managing the market’s expectations is tricky. You do not want its expectations to be too high or too low. We have seen companies convince investors that they will deliver great performance and then not deliver on
those promises. Not only will the share price drop when the market realizes that the company cannot deliver, but it may take years for the company to regain credibility. On the other hand, if the market’s expectations
are too low and your share price is low relative to the opportunities the
company faces, you may be subject to a hostile takeover.
Okay, said Fred, I am ready to go public. Fred initiated an initial public
offering (IPO) and raised the capital he needed for the company.

Fred Expands into Related Formats
Fred’s Hardware grew quickly and regularly beat expectations, so his share
price was a top performer in the market. Fred was confident that his management team could achieve high growth in the Superhardware stores so he
decided to try some new concepts: Fred’s Furniture and Fred’s Garden Supplies. But he was concerned about how to manage the business as it became
increasingly complex. He had always had a good feel for the business, but as
it grew and he had to delegate decisions he was not sure that things would
be managed well.
He told us that his financial people had put in place a planning and control system to closely monitor the economic profit of every store and each
division overall. Economic profit targets were set annually for the next
three years, progress monitored monthly, and managers’ compensation tied
to economic profit against these targets. Yet he was not certain that the company was on track for the long-term performance that he and the market
were expecting.
You need a planning and control system that tells you about the
“health” of the company, the ability of the company to continue growing and creating value, we told Fred. You need a system that incorporates
forward-looking metrics, not just backward-looking ones. Tell me more,
said Fred.
As Fred had pointed out, the problem with financial metrics is that they
cannot tell you how your managers are doing at building the business for
the future. For example, in the short term, managers could improve their

54

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF VALUE CREATION

short-term financial results by cutting back on customer service (the number of employees available in the store at any time to help customers, or
employee training), or deferring maintenance or spending on brand-building.
You must also incorporate metrics related to customer satisfaction or brand
awareness that can give you an idea about the future, not just the current
performance.
Finally, Fred was satisfied. He came back from time to time to see us,
but only for social visits.

Summarizing Fred’s Lessons
Although Fred’s story is simple, it highlights the core ideas about creating
and measuring value. Here are five important lessons Fred learned:
1. In the real market, you create value by earning a return on your invested capital greater than the opportunity cost of capital.
2. The more you can invest at returns above the cost of capital, the more
value you create (growth creates more value as long as the return on
capital exceeds the cost of capital).
3. You should select strategies that maximize the present value of expected cash flows or economic profit (you get the same answer regardless of which you choose).
4. The value of a company’s shares in the stock market is based on the
market’s expectations of future performance (which can deviate
from intrinsic value if the market is less than fully informed about
the company’s true prospects).
5. After an initial price is set, the returns that shareholders earn depend more on the changes in expectations about the company’s future performance than the actual performance of the company. For
example, if a company is expected to earn 25 percent on its investments, but only earns 20 percent, its stock price will drop, even
though the company is earning more than its cost of capital.

FORMALIZING THE VALUE CREATION STORY
Fred’s story explained the basic principles of value creation. The remainder
of this chapter develops the discounted cash flow approach to valuation
more formally.

FORMALIZING THE VALUE CREATION STORY

55

The Intuition behind DCF
To demonstrate the power of discounted cash flow, we start with a simple
example. The following table shows the projected earnings for two companies, Value, Inc. and Volume, Inc.:
Year
Earnings
Value, Inc.
Volume, Inc.

1

2

3

4

5

$100.0
$100.0

105.0
105.0

110.3
110.3

115.8
115.8

121.6
121.6

Based on this information, would you pay more for Value, Inc. or Volume, Inc.? Since the future earnings of both companies are identical, you
might think that they are worth the same. But earnings can be misleading.
It is necessary to examine how each company generated its growth. Following is the projected cash flow for the two companies:
Year
Value, Inc.

1

2

3

4

5

Earnings
Net investment

$100.0
25.0

$105.0
26.2

$110.3
27.6

$115.8
29.0

$121.6
30.4

Cash flow

$175.0

$178.8

$182.7

$186.8

$191.2

Year
Volume, Inc.

1

2

3

4

5

Earnings
Net investment

$100.0
50.0

$105.0
52.5

$110.3
55.1

$115.8
57.9

$121.6
60.8

Cash flow

$150.0

$152.5

$155.1

$157.9

$160.8

Now, which company would you pay more for? Most people would pay
more for Value, Inc. because it generates higher cash flows. Value, Inc.’s
cash flows are higher than Volume, Inc.’s despite identical profits because it
invests less than Volume, Inc. to achieve the same profit growth. Value, Inc.
invests 25 percent of its profits, whereas Volume, Inc. must invest 50 percent
of its profits to generate the same profit growth.
If we assume that both companies have identical risk, we can discount
their cash flows at the same discount rate, say 10 percent. If both companies
continue to grow cash flow at 5 percent, we can use the growing free cash
flow perpetuity formula to value each company.

56

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF VALUE CREATION

Value =

Cash Flow t=1
Cost of Capital − g

The formula assumes that a company’s cash flow will grow at a constant
rate forever.
Using the formula, we compute the value of Value, Inc. to be $1,500 and
Volume, Inc. to be $1,000.
We can also calculate an implied earnings multiple for the two companies by dividing their value by their current earnings. Value, Inc. has an
earnings multiple of 15 and Volume, Inc. of 10. So despite having identical
earnings and earnings growth rates, they have different earnings multiples.
This example illustrates the essential problem with relative value methods
such as earnings multiples. Using an earnings multiple approach, you might
estimate Volume, Inc.’s value by multiplying Value, Inc.’s multiple and Volume’s earnings, particularly if you did not have a forecast of its cash flows.
That would clearly overstate Volume’s value. Relative value methods do not
value directly what matters to investors. Investors cannot buy a house or
car with earnings. Only the cash flow generated by the business can be
used for consumption or additional investment.
The DCF model accounts for the difference in value by factoring in the
capital spending and other cash flows required to generate earnings. DCF
has long been used by companies to evaluate capital spending proposals.
We can also use DCF to value the entire business, which is effectively just a
collection of individual projects.

Drivers of Cash Flow and Value
Technically, once you have estimated and discounted cash flow, you have
completed the valuation. However, projected cash flows will not necessarily
lead to insights about the performance or the competitive position of the
company. Examining only cash flows, you would not be able to answer questions such as these: How does the projection compare with past performance? How does the projection compare with other companies? What
are the important factors that could increase or decrease the value of the
company?
In addition, short-term cash flows are not good performance measures.
A one-year measure of cash flow is meaningless and easy to manipulate. A
company can delay capital spending or cut back on advertising or research
to improve short-term cash flow. On the other hand, large negative cash
flow is not a bad thing if the company is investing to generate even larger
cash flows down the road.

FORMALIZING THE VALUE CREATION STORY

57

As an example, here is the historical and projected cash flow for
Heineken, the Dutch brewer:
Historical Free Cash Flow
(Euro Millions)
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003

Projected Free Cash Flow
(Euro Millions)

197
(495)
42
(685)
(1,124)

2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

(107)
181
320
477
648

There is not much interesting to say about this series of numbers.
What really matters are the drivers of cash flow. There are two key drivers of cash flow and ultimately value: the rate at which the company can
grow its revenues and profits, and its return on invested capital (relative to
the cost of capital). A company that earns higher profits per dollar invested
will be worth more than a company that cannot generate the same level of
returns. Similarly, a faster growing company will be worth more than a
slower growing company if they both earn the same return on invested capital (and this return is high enough to satisfy investors).
The following chart shows Heineken’s performance from the perspective of growth and return on invested capital:

Revenue growth
EBITA growth
ROIC (after goodwill)
Cost of capital

1999–2003 Actual
(Percent)

2004 –2008 Projected
(Percent)

10.7
11.9
13.9
8.2

7.2
5.2
8.9
7.5

Comparing this information with what we know about other businesses, we can better assess how Heineken is performing. We can measure
the company’s growth relative to the industry. We can evaluate whether its
ROIC is improving or deteriorating and how it compares with other
branded consumer-products companies. In Heineken’s case, growth is expected to slow from 10.7 percent per year during the 1999 to 2003 period to
7.2 percent for the next five years. ROIC is projected to drop significantly
from around 14 percent historically to less than 9 percent, due to acquisitions and negative currency effects.
To demonstrate the link between ROIC, growth, and free cash flow, we
next build a simple valuation model. To do this, we return to the example of

58

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF VALUE CREATION

Value, Inc. and model how its cash flows develop year by year. In year 1,
Value, Inc.’s earnings equal $100 and net investment equals $25, so cash
flow equals $75.
Value, Inc.

Year 1

Earnings
Net investment

$100.0
25.0

Free cash flow

$ 75.0

Value, Inc. invested $25 to grow its profits. Assume that Value, Inc. earns
a 20 percent return on its new investment going forward. Year 2’s earnings
would equal year 1’s earnings ($100) plus 20 percent of year 1’s investment
or $5 ($25 × 20 percent) for a total of $105. (We have also assumed that the
earnings on the base level of capital in place at the beginning of year 1 do
not change.) Suppose the company reinvests the same percentage of its operating profits each year and earns the same return on new capital. Value,
Inc.’s cash flow would look as we presented it previously:
Year
Value, Inc.

1

2

3

4

5

Earnings
Net investment

$100.0
25.0

$105.0
26.2

$110.3
27.6

$115.8
29.0

$121.6
30.4

Cash flow

$175.0

$178.8

$182.7

$186.8

$191.2

Each year Value, Inc.’s earnings and cash flow grow at 5 percent and
each year the company reinvests 25 percent of its profits at a return of 20
percent in order to achieve its growth. We can say that in this simple world,
a company’s growth rate is the product of its return on new capital and its
investment rate (net investment divided by operating profits):
Growth Rate = Return on New Invested Capital × Investment Rate

For Value, Inc.,
Growth rate = 20% × 25%
= 5%

Now look at Volume, Inc.’s cash flows. Volume, Inc. also earns $100 in
year 1. However, Volume, Inc. earns only a 10 percent return on its capital.
For Volume, Inc. to increase its profits in year 2 by $5, it must invest $50 in
the first year. Volume, Inc.’s cash flows are as follows:

FORMALIZING THE VALUE CREATION STORY

59

Year
Volume, Inc.

1

2

3

4

5

Earnings
Net investment

$100.0
50.0

$105.0
52.5

$110.3
55.1

$115.8
57.9

$121.6
60.8

Cash flow

$150.0

$152.5

$155.1

$157.9

$160.8

A greater return on invested capital results in more cash flow, given the
same growth rate in operating profits. As noted, Value, Inc. is worth more
than Volume, Inc. despite identical earnings and growth rates.
Now look at how growth drives cash flow and value. Suppose Value,
Inc. wants to increase its growth rate (and it can invest more capital at the
same return). If Value, Inc. wants to grow at 8 percent instead of 5 percent,
it must now invest 40 percent of its earnings each year, as shown next
(we can use the formula developed earlier to calculate the required investment rate):
Year
Value, Inc.

1

2

3

4

5

Earnings
Net investment

$100.0
40.0

$108.0
43.2

$116.6
46.6

$126.0
50.4

$136.0
54.4

Cash flow

$160.0

$164.8

$170.0

$175.6

$181.6

Note that Value, Inc.’s cash flow is lower each year than it had been in
the previous example. At this new higher growth rate, Value, Inc.’s cash
flow is lower than the first scenario until year 9, but from then on the cash
flow becomes much larger (as shown on Exhibit 3.6 on p. 60). Which scenario results in a higher value? It turns out that as long as the return on new
invested capital is greater than the cost of capital used to discount the cash
flow, higher growth will generate greater value. In these two scenarios, if
we assume that the growth and return patterns continue forever and that
Value, Inc.’s cost of capital is 10 percent, then the present value of the 5 percent growth scenario is $1,500 and the present value of the 8 percent growth
scenario is $3,000.
So it is worthwhile for investors to accept lower cash flow in the earlier
years if they are more than made up for in the later years. This also demonstrates why cash flow in isolation is not a good performance measure. Value,
Inc.’s cash flows are lower at 8 percent growth for a number of years, despite the higher value.
Exhibit 3.7 on page 60 shows a matrix of values for a hypothetical company over a range of projected growth rates and returns on invested capital.

60

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF VALUE CREATION

Exhibit 3.6 Value, Inc.: Cash Flow at Different Growth Rates
5 percent growth rate

Earnings
Net investment
Cash flow

Year 1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

100
25
75

105
26
79

110
28
83

116
29
87

122
30
91

128
32
96

134
34
101

141
35
106

148
37
111

155
39
116

163
41
122

171
43
128

8 percent growth rate

Earnings
Net investment
Cash flow

Year 1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

100
40
60

108
43
65

117
47
70

126
50
76

136
54
82

147
59
88

159
63
95

171
69
103

185
74
111

200
80
120

216
86
130

233
93
140

The exhibit assumes a 10 percent cost of capital. A given value can result
from different combinations of growth and return. Since companies cannot
always have more of both, a table like this helps managers set targets for
long-term performance improvement. A company with an already high
ROIC creates more value by increasing growth than by earning ever higher
ROIC. Conversely, companies with low ROIC create more value by increasing ROIC. Exhibit 3.7 also demonstrates what happens when the return on
new invested capital does not exceed the cost of capital. If the return exactly
equals the WACC (weighted average cost of capital), then additional growth
neither creates nor destroys value. This makes sense as investors will not
pay a premium for additional growth if they can earn the same returns elsewhere. If the return on new invested capital is less than WACC, then additional growth actually destroys value. Investors would earn better returns
by investing their capital elsewhere.

Exhibit 3.7 How ROIC and Growth Drive Value1
$ million

Earnings growth
rate (percent)

3
6
9

ROIC (percent)
7.5
887
708
410

Value destruction

10.0
1,000
1,000
1,000
Value neutral

12.5
1,058
1,117
1,354
Value creation

1Assumes starting NOPLAT = 100, WACC = 10 percent, and a 25-year horizon after which ROIC = WACC.

15.0
1,113
1,295
1,591

20.0
1,170
1,442
1,886

FORMALIZING THE VALUE CREATION STORY

61

The Zen of Corporate Finance
Now that we have shown that ROIC and growth drive cash flow and
value, we can go a step further and develop a simple formula that captures
the essence of valuation. To be consistent, we first introduce some terminology that we will use throughout the book. The terms are defined in detail in Part Two.
• NOPLAT (Net Operating Profits Less Adjusted Taxes) represents the
profits generated from the company’s core operations after subtracting the income taxes related to the core operations.
• Invested Capital represents the cumulative amount the business has
invested in its core operations—primarily property, plant, and equipment and working capital.
• Net Investment is the increase in invested capital from one year
to the next.
Net Investment = Invested Capitalt+1 − Invested Capitalt

• FCF (Free Cash Flow) is the cash flow generated by the core operations of the business after deducting investments in new capital.
FCF = NOPLAT − Net Investment

• ROIC (Return on Invested Capital) is the return the company earns
on each dollar invested in the business. (ROIC can be defined in two
ways, as the return on all capital or as the return on new or incremental capital. For now, we assume that both returns are the same.)
ROIC =

NOPLAT
Invested Capital

• IR (Investment Rate) is the portion of NOPLAT invested back into
the business.
IR =

Net Investment
NOPLAT

• WACC (Weighted Average Cost of Capital) is the rate of return that
investors expect to earn from investing in the company and therefore
the appropriate discount rate for the free cash flow. WACC is defined
in detail in Chapter 10.
• g (Growth) is the rate at which the company’s NOPLAT and cash
flow grows each year.

62

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF VALUE CREATION

Assume that the company’s revenues and NOPLAT grow at a constant rate
and the company invests the same proportion of its NOPLAT in its business each year. Investing the same proportion of NOPLAT each year also
means that the company’s free cash flow will grow at a constant rate.
Since the company grows its cash flows at a constant rate, we can begin
by valuing a company using the well-known cash flow perpetuity formula:
Value =

FCFt=1
WACC − g

This formula is well established in the finance and mathematics literature.1 Next, define free cash flow in terms of NOPLAT and the investment rate.
FCF = NOPLAT − Net Investment
= NOPLAT − (NOPLAT × IR)
FCF = NOPLAT × (1 − IR)

Earlier, we developed the relationship between the investment rate (IR),
the company’s projected growth in NOPLAT ( g), and the return on investment (ROIC).2
g = ROIC × IR

Solving for IR, rather than g, leads to,
IR =

g
ROIC

Now build this into the free cash flow definition:

g 
FCF = NOPLAT ×  1 −

ROIC 


Substituting for free cash flow gives the key value driver formula:

Value =

g 

NOPLATt=1  1 −


ROIC 
WACC − g

Substituting the forecast assumptions for Value, Inc. and Volume, Inc. results
in the same values we came up with when we discounted their cash flows:
1

For the derivation, see T. E. Copeland and J. Fred Weston, Financial Theory and Corporate Policy,
3rd ed. (Reading, MA: Addison Wesley, 1988): Appendix A.
2
Technically, we should use the return on new, or incremental capital, but for simplicity here,
we assume that the ROIC and incremental ROIC are equal.

DCF EQUALS THE PRESENT VALUE OF ECONOMIC PROFIT

Company

NOPLATt =1

Growth
(Percent)

Volume, Inc.
Value, Inc. at 5% growth
Value, Inc. at 8% growth

100
100
100

5
5
8

ROIC
WACC
(Percent) ( Percent)
10
20
20

10
10
10

63

Value
1,000
1,500
3,000

We call the key value driver formula the Zen of Corporate Finance because
it relates a company’s value to the fundamental drivers of economic value:
growth, ROIC, and the cost of capital. You might go so far as to say that this
formula represents all there is to valuation. Everything else is mere detail.
So why do we not use this formula in practice? In some cases we do, but
in most situations, the model is overly restrictive, as it assumes a constant
ROIC and growth rate going forward. For companies whose key value drivers are expected to change, we need a model that is more flexible in its
forecasts. Therefore, while we do not use this formula in practice, it is extremely useful as a way to keep the mind focused on what drives value.
In Chapter 4, we present the statistical evidence that, in fact, value in
the stock market is driven by ROIC and growth, as the Zen formula would
predict. In Chapter 6, we provide examples of the actual returns on invested
capital and growth rates that companies have historically achieved.

DCF EQUALS THE PRESENT VALUE OF ECONOMIC PROFIT
When we told Fred’s story, we introduced the concept of economic profit. You
can also value a company using economic profit. The results are identical to
the DCF model. (We show the mathematical proof in Appendix A.)
In the economic profit model, the value of a company equals the amount
of capital invested, plus a premium equal to the present value of the value
created each year. The concept of economic profit is far from new. It dates to
at least 1890, when the economist Alfred Marshall wrote: “What remains of
the owner’s profits after deducting interest on his capital at the current rate
may be called his earnings of undertaking or management.” 3 Marshall said
that the value created by a company during any time period (its economic
profit) must take into account not only the expenses recorded in its accounting records but also the opportunity cost of the capital employed in
the business.
An advantage of the economic profit model over the DCF model is that
economic profit is a useful measure for understanding a company’s performance in any single year, whereas free cash flow is not. For example,
you would not track a company’s progress by comparing actual and projected free cash flow because free cash flow in any year is determined by
discretionary, and potentially important, investments in fixed assets and
3

A. Marshall, Principles of Economics, vol. 1. (New York: MacMillan & Co., 1890): 142.

64

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF VALUE CREATION

working capital. Management could easily improve free cash flow in a
given year at the expense of long-term value creation by simply delaying
investments.
Economic profit measures the value created by a company in a single period and is defined as follows:
Economic Profit = Invested Capital × (ROIC − WACC)

In other words, economic profit equals the spread between the return
on invested capital and the cost of capital times the amount of invested capital. Value, Inc. has invested capital of $500, return on invested capital of 20
percent, and WACC of 10 percent. Its economic profit for the year is $50:
Economic Profit = $500 × (20% − 10%)
= $500 × 10%
= $50

Economic profit translates size, return on capital, and cost of capital
into a single measure. When performing an economic profit valuation, we
discount and sum all future economic profit.
The above formula for economic profit can be rearranged and defined as
after-tax operating profits less a charge for the capital used by the company:
Economic Profit = NOPLAT − Capital Charge
= NOPLAT − (Invested Capital × WACC)

The alternative calculation generates the same value for economic profit.
Economic Profit = $100 − ($500 × 10%)
= $100 − $50
= $50

This approach shows that economic profit is similar in concept to accounting net income, but it explicitly charges a company for all its capital,
not just the interest on its debt.
Using the economic profit approach, the value of a company equals the
amount of capital invested plus a premium or discount equal to the present
value of its projected economic profit:
Value = Invested Capital + Present Value of Projected Economic Profit

Note that if a company earned exactly its WACC every period, then the
discounted value of its projected free cash flow should exactly equal its invested capital: Since no value is created by the company, it is worth exactly

ROIC AND GROWTH DRIVE MULTIPLES

65

what was originally invested. A company is worth more or less than its invested capital only to the extent that it earns more or less than its WACC.
Therefore, the premium or discount relative to invested capital must equal
the present value of the company’s future economic profit.
As shown, Value, Inc. earns $50 a year more than investors demand (its
economic profit). So the value of Value, Inc. equals $500 (its invested capital
at the time of the valuation) plus the present value of its economic profit. In
Value, Inc.’s case, its economic profit is $50 in the first year and it grows by
5 percent each year. The present value of its economic profit can be calculated using the growing perpetuity formula:
Present Value of Economic Profit =

EP
( WACC − g )

Present Value of Economic Profit =

$50
= $1,000
(10% − 5%)

So, Value, Inc.’s value is its invested capital of $500, plus the present
value of its economic profit ($1,000) or $1,500, which is exactly equal to the
value we came up with when we discounted their cash flows.4

ROIC AND GROWTH DRIVE MULTIPLES
Until now, we have focused on how ROIC and growth drive the discounted
cash flow and economic profit valuation. We can also use the key value driver formula to show that ROIC and growth drive common multiples, such
as price-to-earnings and market-to-book.
To see this, divide both sides of the key value driver formula by NOPLAT:
g 


 1 −
ROIC 

Value
=
NOPLATT =1 WACC − g

As the formula shows, a company’s earnings multiple is driven by both
its expected growth and its return on capital.
You can also turn the formula into a value/invested capital formula.
Start with the identity:
4

It appears from the economic profit valuation that the book value of a company drives its economic value. It is true that how we measure a company’s current invested capital affects its economic profit. It does not, however, affect its value. If we overstate the company’s invested
capital, the present value of its future economic profit will be understated by exactly the same
amount, so value will not change, and vice versa.

66

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF VALUE CREATION

NOPLAT = Invested Capital × ROIC

Substituting into the key value driver formula gives:

Value =

g 

Invested Capital × ROIC ×  1 −


ROIC 
WACC − g

Dividing both sides by Invested capital gives:5
g 

 1 −

RONIC 

Value
= ROIC ×
WACC − g
Invested Capital

We encounter many executives who think that earnings multiples are
primarily driven by growth. As a result, they tend to assume that differences in multiples are primarily due to differences in market expectations
about growth. In fact, this idea is perpetuated by the investment community because growth stocks are typically defined as stocks with high earnings multiples. But as the Zen formula demonstrates, multiples are driven
by both growth and ROIC.
Understanding what drives multiples can be quite helpful. We can use
this breakdown of multiples to determine the market’s required expectations about a company’s long-term future growth. Consider Procter &
Gamble and Lowe’s, which both trade near 20 times earnings:

5

Company

Earnings Multiple

ROIC
Percent

Procter & Gamble
Lowe’s

20
20

38
12

Implied
Long-Term Growth
Percent
5
9

If total ROIC and incremental ROIC are not the same, then this equation becomes:

Value
Invested Capital

= ROIC ×

g 

 1 − RONIC 
WACC − g

Where ROIC equals the return on the company’s current capital and RONIC equals the return
on incremental capital.

WHY HAVE MULTIPLES ENDURED?

67

We built DCF models for both companies and asked what assumptions
about future ROIC and growth were consistent with each company’s earnings multiple. We assumed that ROIC was constant (which appeared reasonable in light of history and analysts’ projections) and then solved
backwards for growth. Procter & Gamble achieves its earnings multiple of
20 by having a very high ROIC and modest growth. This is consistent with
its historical performance and the projected growth of its industry. Lowe’s
has a much lower ROIC, but is expected to grow much faster (also consistent with its historical and projected performance).

WHY HAVE MULTIPLES ENDURED?
Now that we have explained the logic behind the DCF approach to valuation, you may be asking why earnings multiples are so commonly used in
analysts’ reports and investment banking pitches. Earnings multiples are a
useful shorthand for communications and a useful sanity check for your
valuation.
Multiples endure because a discounted cash flow valuation requires projections about ROIC, growth, and free cash flow. Because predicting the future is a difficult task, many financial analysts use multiples to avoid
making subjective forecasts. Furthermore, if the expected growth, ROIC,
and cost of capital are similar for a set of companies, they should have similar multiples. If you do not have much information about a company’s expected performance, you will probably assume that their expected growth
and ROIC will match other companies in their industry. So you could value
them by assuming that their earnings multiple will equal that of their peers.
Relying on an industry average multiple, however, can be dangerous. Besides the assumption that the ROIC and growth of the typical company in
the industry match your company’s ROIC and growth, differences in accounting, the effects of inflation, cyclicality, and other factors can distort
multiples. At the end of the day, a well-done industry multiple actually
takes the same level of effort as a good set of cash-flow forecasts.
Multiples can, however, serve as a useful shorthand, especially for
knowledgeable investors. A leading sell side analyst recently told us that he
uses discounted cash flow to analyze and value companies, but that he typically communicates his findings in terms of implied multiples. For example, an analyst might say, “Company X deserves a higher multiple than
company Y because it is expected to grow faster, earn higher margins, or
generate more cash flow.”
In practice, we also use multiples as a sanity check. We always compare
a company’s implied multiple with its peers to see if we can explain why its
multiple is higher or lower (due to growth or ROIC). See Chapter 12 for a
discussion on how to analyze earnings multiples.

68

FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF VALUE CREATION

SUMMARY
This chapter showed that value is driven by expected cash flows. Cash flow,
in turn, is driven by expected returns on capital and growth. These are the
principal lessons of valuation and corporate finance. The remainder of this
book discusses how to apply these concepts, both in more technical terms
(Part Two) and as a manager (Part Three). Before we move on to the details,
however, we first present empirical evidence that long-term ROIC, growth,
and cash flow do indeed drive value.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Why should Fred be more interested in economic profit than returns? How does economic profit relate to growth planning?
2. What prompts the need to move from period-to-period metrics, such
as ROIC or economic profit, to discounted cash flow?
3. Compare and contrast the economic profit to discounted cash flow
approaches. Identify a key advantage of the economic profit model
over the discounted cash flow model.
4. Identify the two key drivers to cash flow. How do these drivers impact corporate value?
5. Identify the five key lessons of value creation.
6. The returns that investors earn are driven not by company performance, but by “performance relative to expectations.” Discuss.
7. What advantage might exist using a multiples approach to corporate
valuation versus either the discounted cash flow model or the economic profit model?
8. Firms A and B are constant growth firms, identical in every aspect
except that the ROIC for A is 15 percent and B is 5 percent. Assume
that management is in the process of establishing an investment rate
of either 40 percent or 60 percent for each firm. Compute the estimated value for each investment rate for each firm given the following information:

REVIEW QUESTIONS

Firm A
Cash flows at t = 1
WACC
Investment rate
Return on new capital

Firm B
Cash flows at t = 1
WACC
Investment rate
Return on new capital

69

$5,000
10%
1. 40%
2. 60%
15%

$5,000
10%
1. 40%
2. 60%
5%

What conclusions should be drawn with respect to the relationship of
WACC to ROIC?

\

4

Do Fundamentals Really
Drive the Stock Market?
In the second half of the 1990s, the S&P 500 Index more than tripled in
value to an all-time high of almost 1,500. Previous unknowns, such as
Amazon and AOL, became stock market superstars, along with a galaxy
of other “New Economy” and dot-com entrants. Then the market crashed,
and many stars flickered out. In the aftermath, people began to question
whether long-held finance theories could really explain such dramatic
swings in share prices. Some would even assert that stock markets lead
lives of their own, detached from the basics of economic growth and business profitability. Should we abandon the discounted cash flow (DCF)
valuations described in Chapter 3 and view the stock market as an arena
where emotions rule?
We think not. Although some stocks, in some sectors, can be driven in
the short term by irrational behavior, the stock market as a whole follows
fundamental laws, grounded in economic growth and returns on investment. In fact, we were surprised at how well this simple, fundamental valuation approach has matched stock market price-to-earnings levels over the
past 40 years.
This chapter presents empirical research that supports our view that return on capital, growth, and free cash flows drive value in the capital markets:
• Companies with higher returns and higher growth (at returns above
the cost of capital) are valued more highly in the stock market.
• To value stocks, markets primarily focus on the long-term and not
short-term economic fundamentals. Although some managers may
believe that missing short-term earnings per share (EPS) targets always has devastating share price implications, the evidence shows
71

72

DO FUNDAMENTALS REALLY DRIVE THE STOCK MARKET?

that share price depends on long-term returns, not short-term EPS
performance itself.
• Stock markets are perfectly capable of seeing the economic fundamentals behind accounting information. Therefore, managers should
not be overly concerned with the implications of new accounting
rules on options or goodwill.
• Stock market valuations correctly reflect underlying economic fundamentals, even when individual investors do not invest on the basis
of the fundamentals. While we agree with proponents of “behavioral
finance” that emotions can run away with parts of the market, such
reactions do not last very long. In fact, we conclude the following for
the U.S. and U.K. stock markets:
—Overall, share price levels have reflected economic fundamentals
quite well over the past four decades. The principles that drove
share prices in the 1960s still remain valid today, despite significant economic ups and downs, industrial restructurings, and technological and other changes.
—Market-wide price deviations from fundamentals can occur, but
they are the exception, not the rule. In the late 1970s, prices were
too low as investors were obsessed with high short-term inflation
rates. In the late 1990s, market prices reached excessive levels that
could not be justified by the underlying economic fundamentals.
• Market-wide price deviations are short-lived: Over the past four
decades, the market corrected itself within a few years to price levels
consistent with economic fundamentals.
Our studies indicate that, in most cases, managers can safely assume
that share prices reflect the markets’ best estimate of intrinsic value. Therefore, managers should continue to make decisions based on discounted cash
flow and economic profit. Even when the market undergoes a period of irrational behavior, as we explain in this chapter, smart managers can detect
and perhaps exploit these market deviations.

SHAREHOLDER VALUE DRIVEN BY RETURN AND GROWTH
In examining the behavior of the stock market, we first must distinguish between what drives market valuation levels (such as market-value-to-capital
ratios) and what drives total return to shareholders (TRS). Market valuation levels are determined by the company’s absolute level of long-term performance and growth, that is, expected revenue and earnings growth and
return on invested capital (ROIC). TRS is measured by changes in the market valuation of a company over some specific time period and is driven by

SHAREHOLDER VALUE DRIVEN BY RETURN AND GROWTH

73

changes in investor expectations for long-term future returns on capital
and growth.

Valuation Levels Driven by Long-Term ROIC and Growth
In Exhibit 4.1, we show that the relative market value of a company, as measured by the market-value-to-capital ratio, is determined by the company’s
growth and its spread of ROIC over the weighted average cost of capital
(WACC). The vertical axis of this graph demonstrates that higher returns
(for the same level of growth, as measured on the horizontal axis) lead to
higher valuations. Also, when the return on invested capital exceeds the cost
of capital, growth leads to higher value. When ROICs fall below the cost of
capital, however, higher growth leads to lower valuations. These results, introduced in Chapter 3, are based on a two-stage variant of the key value driver formula (see Chapter 9 for details of the two-stage version underlying
Exhibit 4.1).
Although Exhibit 4.1 is a theoretical model, the stock market supports
its conclusions. In fact, the empirical results were similar when we compared the market-value-to-capital ratios of more than 500 of the largest U.S.
listed companies versus their 10-year growth in sales and 10-year average
return on invested capital (ROIC). We grouped the companies by sales

Exhibit 4.1 Theoretical Relationship between Market Value,
ROIC, and Growth
WACC = 8 percent
Market value/
Capital ratio1
10

ROIC

15%

9
8
7

12%

6
5
4

9%
3
2
1
0
0%

1

6%
5%

10%
15%
Revenue growth

Assumes a competitive advantage period of 10 years, after which ROIC = WACC is assumed.

20%

25%

74

DO FUNDAMENTALS REALLY DRIVE THE STOCK MARKET?

Exhibit 4.2 Empirical Relationship between Market Value, ROIC,
and Growth
Sample of 563 North American companies
Market value/
Capital ratio, 20031
8

2

ROIC

<15%

7
6
5

12–15%

4

9–12%
3
2

6–9%
0–6%

1
0
0–5

5–10
10–15
15–20
Revenue growth 1993–2003 CAGR (percent)

20–25

1
Defined as market value of operations divided by invested capital including goodwill.
2

ROIC based on invested capital including goodwill.

growth and ROIC (e.g., companies with average sales growth between
5 percent and 10 percent and ROICs between 12 percent and 15 percent),
calculating the average market-value-to-capital ratio for each group. Exhibit 4.2 shows the results of this analysis. Although the empirical results
do not fit the theoretical model perfectly, they demonstrate that for any
level of growth, higher returns lead to higher market-value-to-capital ratios. Indeed, the market seems to value companies based on revenue
growth and ROIC.
We also tested these results by regressing the market-value-to-capital
ratios against growth and ROIC. The results, shown in Exhibit 4.3, were
compelling: ROIC and growth account for 46 percent of the variation in
market-value-to-capital ratios. We then divided the full sample into five
subgroups with similar ROICs. Within each subgroup, we regressed the
market-value-to-capital ratios against growth and found, as theory would
predict, that as ROIC increases, growth is increasingly related to value. Indeed, in the case of the high-ROIC subgroups, the slope of the regression
line is positive and statistically significant. For the low-ROIC subgroups, it
is almost flat or not significant. Thus, the empirical evidence shows that the
stock market does not reward companies that pursue growth without covering their cost of capital.

SHAREHOLDER VALUE DRIVEN BY RETURN AND GROWTH

75

Exhibit 4.3 Regressions of Market-Value-to-Capital with ROIC
and Growth
Dependent
variable

Number of
observations

R2

Variable1

Slope1

t-Stat1

P-value12

1

563

46%

ROIC

19.3

21.5

0%

Variable2

Slope2

t-Stat2

P-value2

Growth

2.0

3.4

0%

Number of
observations

Variable1

Slope1

t-Stat1

P-value12

0 – 6%

1

MV/IC

93

Growth

0.25

0.52

60%

6 – 9%

MV/IC1

146

Growth

0.76

0.82

41%

9 – 12%

MV/IC1

124

Growth

3.22

2.83

1%

12 – 15%

MV/IC1

61

Growth

2.14

1.43

16%

>15%

MV/IC1

139

Growth

7.99

3.18

0%

Full sample

ROIC cohort

MV/IC

Dependent
variable

1

Defined as market value of operations divided by invested capital including goodwill.
P-value represents the probability that the tested relationship does not hold, with a P-value of 5% used as the threshold of
statistical significance.

2

On an industry level, we see the same pattern. An analysis of 130 European and U.S. publicly traded chemical companies between 1963 and 2001
showed that companies with higher sales growth achieved a higher market
valuation only if they could generate returns above their cost of capital,
which is close to the average ROIC in this industry (see Exhibit 4.4 on p. 76).
The market penalized companies that attempted growth but earned returns
below their cost of capital.
In another test, we applied discounted cash flow to estimate the value of
the five leading companies in each of four industry sectors—pharmaceuticals, electric utilities, consumer goods and oil—that had different growth
and profitability profiles. We developed forecasts based on long-term historical results and projections from the Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System (IBES) analyst consensus estimates.1 We then discounted the cash
flows at the weighted average cost of capital (WACC) for each company.
Based on these forecasts, our estimates corresponded very closely to each
company’s market-value-to-capital ratios for all of the industry sectors, as
shown in Exhibit 4.5 on page 77.
Since expected future growth and returns for companies are not directly measurable, we cannot assert scientific proof for our claims. But
these tests provide evidence that cash flow, led by the combination of revenue growth and return on capital, drives the value of companies.
1

Thomson Financial, Institutional Brokers’ Estimate System (IBES).

76

DO FUNDAMENTALS REALLY DRIVE THE STOCK MARKET?

Exhibit 4.4 Value of Commodity Chemical Companies
Driven by ROIC and Growth
Market value/Capital ratio, 20021
Sales growth
Above average

Above average

1.5

1.6

Below average

1.3

0.5

ROIC

Below average

1

June 2002 (based on Invested Capital 2001).
Source: T. Augat, E. Bartels, and F. Budde, “Multiple Choice for the Chemicals Industry,” McKinsey on Finance,
Number 8 (Summer 2003), pp. 1–7.

Changes in Expectations Drive Total Returns to Shareholders
In Chapter 3, we discussed how total returns to shareholders (TRS) are driven
by performance against expectations and not absolute levels of performance.
For example, on July 13, 2004, Intel reported a second-quarter net income of
$1.76 billion, almost double what it had reported for that period a year earlier.
Nevertheless, Intel’s share price declined by 11 percent on the day of the announcement, because its sales and margins, considered important indicators
for long-term profitability in the sector, were below the market’s expectations. Over horizons of 15 years and more, of course, TRS will be linked to
earnings, because over the long term, earnings growth will track cash flows.
Over shorter periods, however, performance against expectations should generally influence TRS more than the level of earnings and growth itself.
To test what drives TRS, we conducted a statistical analysis, correlating
TRS with such traditional performance measures as cash flow and economic profit. We also correlated TRS with changes in cash flow expectations, using consensus earnings forecasts from IBES. As theory would
suggest, there is a strong relationship between TRS and changes in performance expectations. However, there is almost no relationship between TRS
and the various absolute cash flow or economic profit measures. Exhibit 4.6
on page 78 summarizes the results for the S&P 500 companies over the past
10 years. When we exclude the market bubble years of 1999 to 2001, the
analysis shows that 18 percent of the TRS variation across the sample can be
explained by the changes in investor expectations (as measured by the R2 of

MARKET FOCUSES ON LONG TERM RATHER THAN SHORT TERM

77

Exhibit 4.5 DCF Valuation Close to Actual Market Value
DCF results relative to market value of equity, index
Electric Utilities

Consumer Goods
123

105

108

108

107
98

EON

ELE

EN

RWEA

103

94

SSEZY

Pharmaceuticals

UN

NSRGY

PG

98

95

KFT

LORLY

Oil Majors
126

107

103

97

92

99

RD/SC

C VX

76

74

PFE

98
88

GSK

JNJ

NVS

MRK

XOM

BP

TOT

Source: Annual reports, IBES, Bloomberg, McKinsey analysis.

the regression), far greater than for absolute measures of cash flow and economic profit.

MARKET FOCUSES ON LONG TERM RATHER THAN SHORT TERM
Many managers believe that the stock market focuses too narrowly on nearterm earnings, giving companies too little credit for long-term investments.
But we disagree: A quick look at the high values for companies without any
near-term earnings (such as in biotech or high-tech) indicates that the market indeed takes a long-term view. In September 2004, the stock market capitalization of Sirius Satellite Radio was $4 billion. Yet as of that date, Sirius

78

DO FUNDAMENTALS REALLY DRIVE THE STOCK MARKET?

Exhibit 4.6 Change in Expectations Is Key Driver of Total
Return to Shareholders
S&P 500 companies, 1993–2003
Adjusted R2 (percent)
Expectations
measure1

18.0

Change in
cash flow

8.0

Actual 0.0
cash flow2

FY0
FY1
LTG

Coefficient

t-Statistic

P-value3

0.15
0.33
1.91

4.7
10.5
8.6

0%
0%
0%

0.32

13.5

0%

0.15

3.0

0%

Change in
economic profit

1.5

0.08

5.1

0%

Actual
economic profit2

2.0

0.49

6.9

0%

1

Expectations measure is based on change in analyst consensus EPS forecast for running fiscal year (FY0), the following fiscal year (FY1) and
change in analyst consensus 5-year growth expectation (LTG).

2
Scaled based on actual revenues.
3

P-value represents the probability that the tested relationship does not hold, with p-value of 5% used as the threshold
of statistical significance.
Source: Datastream, Compustat, IBES, Bloomberg, McKinsey analysis.

had reported sales of only $30 million and was still generating accounting
losses. Why the large valuation? Investors believed Sirius would generate
significant cash flows at some point in the future. More dramatically, in the
late 1990s, the stock market’s long-term view was certainly demonstrated in
the ascent of Internet stocks, based on companies without concrete products, let alone profits. That time, the market was wrong; long-term earnings
never materialized for many of these companies. Nonetheless, the market
did not narrowly focus on near-term earnings when valuing these companies. (Chapter 23 describes the valuation of very high growth companies.)
Many managers complain, however, that the markets are increasingly
sensitive to short-term earnings surprises. As a result, what some call the
“EPS game” has emerged, in which corporations try to meet short-term
EPS targets at almost any cost, for fear of missing analysts’ expectations.
Underscoring this, more than three-quarters of the financial executives in
a recent survey said they would forgo economic value creation to avoid
missing earnings targets and suffering the associated market reactions.2
Missing short-term EPS targets by itself does not lead to lower share
prices. In many cases, however, investors have only short-term results by
which to gauge long-term corporate performance. In these cases, they interpret the most recent EPS performance as an omen of long-term performance
declines and/or loss of management credibility, so the missed target will
lower a company’s share prices. But if management can convince the market
2

J. Graham, C. Harvey, and S. Rajgopal, “The Economic Implications of Corporate Financial Reporting” ( Journal of Accounting and Economics, forthcoming).

MARKET FOCUSES ON LONG TERM RATHER THAN SHORT TERM

79

Exhibit 4.7 Long-Term Performance Expectations Drive Share Price
Abnormal return on 137 announcements of fiscal
year earnings for 2002 by US companies,
percent
Actual EPS 2002 relative to expected EPS
for 2002—“short-term surprise”
Change in expected
EPS for 2004—
“change in longterm expectations”

Lower

Higher

Positive

2.3

3.6

Negative

(4.1)

1.0

Source: Datastream, IBES, McKinsey analysis.

that poor short-term earnings will not affect long-term profitability or
growth, then the share prices need not fall. Exhibit 4.7 shows the share price
reaction to the profit announcements of 137 U.S. companies in 2002.3 There
was no negative share price impact when undershooting earnings did not
affect the outlook for longer-term business profitability. But when there
was a clear indication of effect on long-term profit expectations, the share
price had a strong negative reaction. Reactions had nothing to do with shorttermism but involved real changes in long-term prospects.
In the pharmaceutical industry, announcements relating to products
under development can affect share prices far more than quarterly earnings
announcements. This makes sense: Product and pipeline development is a
much better indicator of the long-term growth and profitability of pharmaceutical companies than short-term earnings. Markets understand this
well, and as Exhibit 4.8 shows on page 80, prices react strongly to pipeline
announcements, even when there is no impact on current earnings.
When a high-profile company misses an earnings target, it makes headlines, but the impact of short-term earnings on share prices should not be
overstated. In an examination of a large sample of quarterly earnings announcements by U.S. companies between 1992 and 1997, earnings surprises
explained less than 2 percent of share price volatility in the four weeks surrounding announcements.4 In fact, more than 40 percent of companies with
3
The sample includes selected companies from the S&P 500 Index for which the change in reported EPS and expected EPS was at least 2 percent.
4
W. Kinney, D. Burgstahler, and R. Martin, “Earnings Surprise ‘Materiality’ as Measured by
Stock Returns,” Journal of Accounting Research, 40(5) (December 2002): 1297–1329.

80

DO FUNDAMENTALS REALLY DRIVE THE STOCK MARKET?

Exhibit 4.8 Market Reaction to Pharmaceutical Product Announcements
Abnormal returns percent, 1998–2003
Announcement
return –1/+1 day

Announcement
return –3/+3 days

14.8

14.1

Lilly-Zovant

Development
successes
(e.g., approvals)

AstraZeneca-Nexium

12.0

8.3

Lilly-Evista

11.8

10.8

Wyeth-Enbrel

11.1

2.3

Wyeth-Protonix

8.6

4.6

Abbott-Humira

7.9

5.0

(6.4)

Pfizer-Zeldox

Development
setbacks
(e.g., withdrawals)

(1.4)

(12.3)

(13.7)

Schering-Angeliq

(12.6)

(10.0)

NovoNordisk-Levormeloxifene

(15.5)

(7.7)

NovoNordisk-Ragaglitazar

BMS-Vanlev 2

(16.4)

(18.4)

AstraZeneca-Iressa

(19.2)

(20.3)

BMS-Vanlev 1

(25.5)

(24.9)

Source: Datastream, Factiva, McKinsey analysis.

a positive (or negative) earnings surprise actually had a negative (or positive) return. This underscores our conclusion that short-term earnings do
not drive share prices.
Share prices are determined by long-term cash flows. To test the stock
market’s time horizon, we examine how much of a company’s share price is
accounted for by expected cash flows over the next several years. For a subset of S&P 500 companies, dividends expected in the first five years explained less than 9 percent of the market value, on average (see Exhibit 4.9),
another illustration of the market’s long-term view. Whether considering
biotechs or the largest blue chips, investors value long-term cash flows.
The academic literature also finds evidence confirming the long-term
view of stock markets:
• In general, stock markets reward R&D and advertising initiatives despite their negative impact on short-term earnings.5 However, for companies with a weak outlook for future value creation from growth, the
5

See, for example, K. Chauvin and M. Hirschey, “Advertising, R&D Expenditures and the Market Value of the Firm: Mergers and Acquisitions,” Financial Management, 22 (1993): 128–140; and
R. C. Graham and K. D. Frankenberger, “The Contribution of Changes in Advertising Expenditures to Earnings and Market Values,” Journal of Business Research, 50 (2001): 149–155.

MARKET FOCUSES ON LONG TERM RATHER THAN SHORT TERM

81

Exhibit 4.9 Present Value of Expected Dividends1 for Selected
S&P 500 Companies
Present value of
dividends expected
over the next five years
$
Abbott Laboratories
4.97
Boeing
3.38
Campbell Soup
3.23
Dow Chemical
6.66
Eli Lilly
6.73
Ford Motor Co
1.90
Gillette
3.36
Hewlett-Packard
1.52
International Business Machines
3.04
Johnson & Johnson
4.80
Kellogg
5.26
Lockheed Martin
3.07
McDonald's
1.98
New York Times
2.92
Occidental Petroleum
5.45
PepsiCo
3.20
Rohm & Haas
4.23
Sears Roebuck
4.61
Texas Instruments
0.40
United Parcel Service
4.73
Wal-Mart Stores
1.82

Share price
$
43.59
42.14
26.80
41.57
70.33
16.00
36.73
22.97
92.68
51.66
38.08
51.40
24.83
47.79
42.24
46.62
42.71
45.49
29.38
74.55
53.05

Dividends as
percentage
of stock price
(percent)
11.4
8.0
12.1
16.0
9.6
11.9
9.2
6.6
3.3
9.3
13.8
6.0
8.0
6.1
12.9
6.9
9.9
10.1
1.4
6.3
3.4
Average 8.7

1

Assuming 7% growth in dividends during next 5 years. Cost of equity based on risk free rate of 4.3%, market risk premium of
5.0% and Bloomberg beta.
Source: Bloomberg, McKinsey analysis.

stock market typically shows a negative price reaction. Further supporting our belief that the stock market has a sophisticated long-term
view, investors reward R&D spending only if companies are expected
to create value from it.6
• Announcements of capital expenditure increases and strategic investments usually boost share prices, even though such moves typically
depress current cash flow and earnings.7 For capital expenditures,
growth opportunities are critical in explaining the stock market’s

6

S. Szewczyk, G. Tsetsekos, and Z. Zantout, “The Valuation of Corporate R&D Expenditures:
Evidence from Invest ment Opportunities and Free Cash Flow,” Financial Management, 25(1)
(1996): 105 –110.
7
See, for example, J. R. Woolridge, “Competitive Decline and Corporate Restructuring,” Journal
of Applied Corporate Finance, 1 (1988): 26 –36; and J. J. McConnell and C. J. Muscarella, “Corporate
Capital Expenditure Decisions and the Market Value of the Firm,” Journal of Financial Economics,
14(3) (1985): 399– 422.

82

DO FUNDAMENTALS REALLY DRIVE THE STOCK MARKET?

reaction. The market reacts far more favorably, the better the prospects
for value-creating growth.8
• Stock markets generally react positively to write-offs of bad investments despite their impact on short-term earnings. For example, restructuring write-offs (as opposed to restructuring cash costs) are
positively received, and the price reaction is especially strong if the
corporation is losing money and has recently changed management.9

MARKETS SEE FUNDAMENTALS BEHIND
ACCOUNTING INFORMATION
We have shown how market valuations are driven by economic fundamentals such as long-term return on capital and growth, which in turn drive
long-term cash flows. Yet many managers remain obsessed with reported
earnings, arguing that earnings are the key driver of share prices. Does the
market respond primarily to surface accounting numbers, or does it dig
down more deeply? As the following examples demonstrate, the market
does indeed dig beneath reported earnings—right down to the underlying
economic fundamentals.
It is true, however, that share prices will move when companies report
higher or lower earnings if the accounting results reflect unexpected changes
in underlying cash flows. This may occur with the availability of additional
information, perhaps as a consequence of an accounting disclosure, such as a
goodwill impairment—if the adjustment reveals lower benefits than expected from past acquisitions. Similarly, the change from last-in-first-out
(LIFO) to first-in-first-out (FIFO) inventory accounting can swing share
prices, not because of the change in reported earnings, but because of the tax
implications of the move.
In addition, fraud or the manipulation of accounting information can
cause shares to rise above the real value of the corporation. But markets
can be fooled only so long. Sooner or later, cash flows must justify the
share price.

Different Accounting Standards Do Not Lead to Different Values
Stock markets do not take reported earnings at face value. Evidence comes
from companies that report different accounting results for different stock
markets. Non-U.S. companies that have securities listed in the United
States, for example, are required to report equity and net profit under U.S.
8
T. J. Brailsford and D. Yeoh, “Agency Problems and Capital Expenditure Announcements,”
Journal of Business, 77(2) (2004): 223 –256.
9
P. K. Chaney, C. E. Hogan, and D. C. Jeter, “The Information Content of Restructuring Charges:
A Contextual Analysis” (working paper, Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University, 2000).

MARKETS SEE FUNDAMENTALS BEHIND ACCOUNTING INFORMATION

83

Exhibit 4.10 No Clear Impact of U.S. GAAP Reconciliations
Average cumulative abnormal return (CAR) index
110
108
–1/+1

106
Positive earnings
impact (n = 16)

104
102
100

CAR
t-Stat

(0.5%)
(1.54)

Negative earnings CAR
impact (n = 34)
t-Stat

1.7%
14.63

98
96
94
92
90
–30 –25 –20 –15 –10

–5

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Day relative to announcement
Source: SEC Filings, Datastream, Bloomberg, McKinsey analysis.

Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), which can differ significantly from the equity and net profit reported under their domestic accounting standards. If stock prices are truly based on reported earnings,
which would investors choose—the earnings reported under U.S. GAAP or
domestic accounting standards? To the market, it doesn’t matter. The market is not interested in accounting choices; investors care about underlying
performance.
To prove the point, we analyzed a sample of 50 European companies
that began reporting reconciliations of equity and profit to U.S. GAAP after
obtaining U.S. listings between 1997 and 2004. The differences between net
income and equity under U.S. and local accounting standards were often
quite large: In more than half of the cases, the deviation was more than 30
percent. Many executives probably worried that lower earnings under U.S.
GAAP would translate directly to a lower share price. But this was not the
case. As shown in Exhibit 4.10, even though two-thirds of the companies in
our sample reported lower earnings following U.S. disclosure, the stock
market reaction to their disclosure was positive. Evidently, increased disclosure outweighed any artificial accounting effects.

Treatment of Goodwill Does Not Affect Share Price
Since 2001 under U.S. GAAP and 2005 under International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) goodwill is no longer amortized on the income
statement according to fixed schedules. Instead, companies must write off

84

DO FUNDAMENTALS REALLY DRIVE THE STOCK MARKET?

Exhibit 4.11 No Consistent Market Reaction to SFAS-142
Goodwill Announcement
Abnormal return on announcement date, percent
Summary statistics
n
=
54
= 0.0%
R2
Slope
= (0.01)
t-Stat
= (0.15)
P-value = 88.5%

20
15
10
5
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

-5
-10
-15
Goodwill amortization as percent of
year end equity market value, 2001
Source: Datastream, McKinsey analysis.

goodwill only when the goodwill is impaired based on business valuations
by independent auditors. What effect did changes in accounting for goodwill have on share prices? To answer this question, we looked at this accounting change’s impact on share price in two ways.
First, we investigated the share price reactions for companies that
stopped amortizing significant amounts of goodwill. These companies would
show an increase in reported EPS after this change, since goodwill amortization was no longer charged to the income statement. We analyzed the share
price reaction for a sample of 54 U.S. companies with significant goodwill on
the day of the announcement in July, 2001 that goodwill amortization in the
United States would be abolished.10 The implied increase in EPS for these
companies boosted initial share prices on average, but within two weeks, the
prices had returned to normal. Obviously, the market realized that the accounting treatment of goodwill amortization does not affect cash flows. Furthermore, as shown in Exhibit 4.11, the initial share price reaction was not
related to the relative amount of goodwill amortization for these companies,
and for about a third of the sample the share price actually declined on announcement.
We also looked at 54 companies in the United States and Europe that
wrote off significant amounts of impaired goodwill against their profit
10
The sample consists of selected U.S. companies for which annual goodwill amortization was
at least 1 percent of the market capitalization.

MARKETS SEE FUNDAMENTALS BEHIND ACCOUNTING INFORMATION

85

Exhibit 4.12 Market Reaction at Announcement of Goodwill Impairment
Cumulative abnormal return (CAR) index, n = 54
110

–1/+1
CAR
t-Stat

105

0.1%
0.3

100
Average

95
90
85
80
75

Time Warner

70
65
–30 –25 –20 –15 –10

–5

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Day relative to announcement
Source: SEC Filings, Datastream, Bloomberg, McKinsey analysis.

since January 2002.11 In this case, as shown in Exhibit 4.12, we did not find a
statistically significant drop in share prices on the day of the write-off announcement. Why? The markets already had anticipated the lower benefits
from past acquisitions and had reduced the stock price by an average 35 percent in the six months preceding the write-off announcement.
For example, Time Warner announced on January 7, 2002, that it would
write off $54 billion in goodwill. Time Warner’s stock returns, plotted in
Exhibit 4.12, show that the share price actually moved up somewhat on the
day of the announcement, relative to major market indexes. However, Time
Warner’s stock had already lost as much as 37 percent over the six months
prior to the announcement. Thus, despite significant changes in reported
earnings caused by the changes in accounting from goodwill, there was no
immediate impact on share price. The markets looked through current
earnings to the underlying long-term cash flow.
Given overwhelming evidence that in the past the stock market looked
beyond goodwill amortization when assessing pooling versus purchasing accounting for mergers and acquisitions, these findings should come as no surprise.12 In fact, goodwill amortization as such never mattered—neither when
it showed up in the financial statements nor when it disappeared.
11
The sample comprises selected U.S. and European companies with a market capitalization of
at least $500 million and an impairment charge of at least 2 percent of market capitalization.
12
See, for example, E. Lindenberg, and M. Ross, “To Purchase or to Pool: Does It Matter?” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 12(2) (Summer 1999): 32– 47.

86

DO FUNDAMENTALS REALLY DRIVE THE STOCK MARKET?

Accounting for Employee and Management Stock Options Is
Irrelevant for Market Value
In the debate over whether employee stock options should be expensed in
the income statement, much of the concern has centered on whether the
negative earnings impact will drive stock prices lower. From a capital market perspective, the answer is clear: As long as investors have sufficient information on the amount, terms, and conditions of the options granted,
new expensing rules will not drive down share prices. In fact, according to
a recent study, companies that voluntarily began expensing their employee
options before it became mandatory experienced positive share price reactions when they announced their intentions to expense options, despite the
negative impact on reported earnings.13 The price reaction was especially
strong when companies said they were expensing their options to boost
transparency. The same researchers found that when sufficient information
about the options is disclosed, the stock market includes the options values
in its valuation of the companies—even when these values are not explicitly
expensed in the income statement.14
We came to a similar conclusion after examining 120 U.S. companies
that began voluntarily expensing their stock options in their income statements between July 2002 and May 2004. There was no negative share price
impact around the disclosure of earnings; instead, share prices rose on the
announcement day. Furthermore, as shown in Exhibit 4.13, there is no relation between the net income impact from option expensing and the abnormal returns during the days surrounding the new policy’s announcement.
In this case, the market already had the relevant information on the option
plans and was not confused by a change in reporting policy.

LIFO/FIFO Inventory Reporting Does Not Influence Share Prices
(But the Tax Impact Does)
A classic example of how cash flow matters more than profits can be seen in
the impact that different inventory accounting methods have on these two
measures. For instance, during periods when prices are rising, changing
from FIFO to LIFO can decrease accounting profits yet lead to higher free
cash flows. As prices rise, the LIFO inventory method results in lower earnings than the FIFO method, since the cost of goods sold is based on more recent, higher costs. Lower pretax earnings mean lower income taxes. Since
the pretax cash flow is the same regardless of the accounting method, LIFO
accounting leads to a higher after-tax cash flow than FIFO accounting, despite the lower reported earnings.
13
D. Aboody, M. Barth, and R. Kasznik, “Firms’ Voluntary Recognition of Stock-Based Compensation Expense,” Journal of Accounting Research, 42(2) (December 2004): 251–275.
14
D. Aboody, M. Barth, and R. Kasznik, “SFAS No. 123 Stock-Based Compensation Expense and
Equity Market Values,” Accounting Review, 79(2) (2004): 251–275.

SIGNIFICANT DEVIATIONS FROM INTRINSIC VALUE

87

Exhibit 4.13 Voluntary Option Expensing Has No Impact on Share Price
Abnormal return on announcement date, percent

6.0

Summary statistics

4.0

n
R2
Slope
t-Stat
P-value

= 120
= 0.4%
= 0.01
= 0.7
= 47.1%

2.0

0
10.0

20.0

30.0

40.0

–2.0

–4.0

–6.0

Impact of option expense on
pre-tax income (percent1)

1

Defined as the absolute value of option expense divided by the pre-tax earnings before option expense.
Source: SEC Filings, Datastream, Bloomberg, McKinsey analysis.

Any manager improperly focused solely on earnings would argue that
switching from FIFO to LIFO will result in lower share prices as investors
react to lower reported earnings. Yet research shows that switching from
FIFO to LIFO actually lifts share prices. This is due to increased cash flow,
as the DCF model predicts. After adjusting for movements in the broad
market and other contemporary effects, companies switching to LIFO experienced significant increases in share prices, whereas firms switching to
FIFO saw share prices decline (see Exhibit 4.14 on p. 88). In fact, one study
found that the larger the reduction in taxes following the switch to LIFO,
the greater the share price increase attributed to the change.15

SIGNIFICANT DEVIATIONS FROM INTRINSIC VALUE ARE
RELATIVELY RARE AND SHORT-LIVED
When managers make good strategic decisions based on DCF analyses, the
financial markets will reward them by setting stock prices according to
their company’s economic fundamentals. This relationship helps the manager put the company’s resources to their best use—and create maximum
value for shareholders. Remember, a volatile stock price does not mean
15
G. Biddle and F. Lindahl, “Stock Price Reactions to LIFO Adoptions: The Association between
Excess Returns and LIFO Tax Savings,” Journal of Accounting Research, 20(2) (1982): 551–588.

88

DO FUNDAMENTALS REALLY DRIVE THE STOCK MARKET?

Cumulative abnormal return, percent

–12

–7

0.125

0.125

0.075

0.075

0.025

0.025

–2

3

8

13

–12

–7

–2

–0.025

–0.025

–0.075

–0.075

–0.125
Months from the date of accounting change

3

8

13

–0.125
Months from the date of accounting change

Source: S. Sunder, “Relationship Between Accounting Changes and Stock Prices: Problems of Measurement and Some Empirical Evidence,”
Empirical Research in Accounting: Selected Studies, 1973.

prices do not reflect intrinsic value. For instance, the share price of a biotech
company may have reflected its economic fundamentals several years ago,
but today the stock may be selling for much less if the company failed to
commercialize its products.
Also, while random deviations from intrinsic value can occur in stocks
from time to time, managers are still best off assuming that the market will
correctly reflect the intrinsic value of their decisions. What managers must
be alert to, however, are systematic deviations from intrinsic value, especially those that can affect strategic financial decisions, such as whether
and when to issue new shares or pursue acquisitions.
But is there really evidence for such systematic deviations in stock markets? Since the seminal article by Werner DeBondt and Richard Thaler in
1985,16 some finance academics and practitioners have argued that stock
markets are not efficient—that they do not necessarily reflect economic fundamentals.17 According to this “behavioral” point of view, significant and
lasting deviations from intrinsic value occur in market valuations.18 To be
16
W. DeBondt and R. Thaler, “Does the Stock Market Overreact?” Journal of Finance, 40(3)
(1985): 793 –805.
17
We loosely define efficient markets here as markets ref lecting economic fundamentals.
18
For an overview of behavioral finance, see N. Barberis and R. Thaler, “A Survey of Behavioral
Finance,” in Handbook of the Economics of Finance, edited by G. M. Constantinides et al. (Boston,
MA: Elsevier Science, 2003): 1054 –1123; and J. Ritter, “Behavioral Finance,” Pacific-Basin Finance
Journal, 11(4) (September 2003): 429– 437.

SIGNIFICANT DEVIATIONS FROM INTRINSIC VALUE

89

sure, behavioral finance offers some valuable insights, chief among them
that markets are not always right because market imperfections prevent rational investors from correcting mispricing by irrational investors. We cannot disagree with that. But how often do these deviations arise, and are
they so significant that they should affect how managers make their financial decisions? Significant deviations from intrinsic value are rare, and markets revert to the economic fundamentals rapidly enough that managers
should continue to base their decisions on DCF analyses.

Key Conditions for Market Deviations
In our interpretation of behavioral finance, markets fail to reflect economic
fundamentals under three conditions:
1. Irrational investor behavior. “Irrational” investors do not process all
available information correctly when forming expectations on the
stock’s future performance. Studies of the investment behavior of
professional fund managers and analysts show various forms of such
irrationality. For example, individual investors overreact and attach
too much importance to recent events and results, so they overprice
companies with strong recent performance. Also, individuals are
overly conservative in updating expectations, so they underprice
stocks that have released positive news on earnings.
2. Systematic patterns of behavior across different investors. If individual investors decided to buy or sell without consulting economic fundamentals, the impact on share prices would be limited. Only when
they behave irrationally also in a systematic way (i.e., when large
groups of investors share particular patterns of behavior) should persistent price deviations occur. Behavioral finance theory argues that
patterns of overconfidence, overreaction, and overrepresentation are
common to many investors, and such groups can be large enough to
prevent a company’s share price—at least for some stocks, some of
the time—from reflecting underlying economic fundamentals.
3.

Limits to arbitrage in financial markets. If there are enough rational investors in a market, and there are no barriers to arbitrage, systematic
patterns of irrational behavior can be exploited, and they will not
have lasting effects on market valuations. In reality, such arbitrage is
not always possible. Transaction costs and risks are involved in setting up and running the arbitrage positions.

Assume that a company’s share price has dramatically increased over
the past few months because the company surprised the market with betterthan-expected results. Based solely on this strong recent performance,

90

DO FUNDAMENTALS REALLY DRIVE THE STOCK MARKET?

investors might believe this company will continue to exceed market expectations and thus start bidding for shares. According to behavioral finance
theory, many investors will demonstrate this type of myopic behavior, creating upward pressure on the share price.
As long as a sufficient number of investors can identify and take short
positions against overpricing on the part of these myopic investors, the
share price will return to its fundamental level. In practice, however, this
may not be the case; the costs, complexity, and risks involved in setting up a
short position may be too high for those who invest on economic fundamentals. One example is so-called “noise trader” risk. It is uncertain how long
price deviations will persist, and whether they will increase before finally
disappearing. If for some reason investors focused on fundamentals abandon their positions before the share price returns to its fundamental value,
they would incur a loss.
When the preceding three conditions all apply, behavioral finance predicts that pricing biases in financial markets can be both significant and
persistent.
Some well-known examples of such market deviations can help us understand whether, if, or how these conditions should change our perspectives on how finance theory applies to real-world decision making by
corporate managers.

Market Overreaction and Underreaction, Reversal and Momentum
Over the past decade two well-known patterns of price deviations in
stock markets have received considerable attention in academic studies:
short-term momentum and long-term reversal in share prices. Reversal
means that high-performing stocks of the past years typically become
low-performing stocks over the next few years.19 Momentum is a phenomenon in which positive returns for stocks over the past several months are
typically followed by several months of continued positive returns.20 The
literature on behavioral finance offers several explanations for these price
patterns, but the debate remains far from settled.
Some behaviorists argue reversal is caused by investor overreaction: Investors put too much weight on companies’ recent performance. When
companies have performed well in recent years, investors are inclined to
extrapolate that success into the future. As a result, share prices increase
too much, and when cash flows fail to meet projections, investors adjust
their expectations, bringing on a reversal. The winning stocks of the past
19

First documented by DeBondt and Thaler, “Does the Stock Market Overreact?”
See, for example, N. Jegadeesh and S. Tit man, “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling
Losers: Implications for Stock Market Efficiency,” Journal of Finance, 48(1) (1993): 65 –92; and
N. Jegadeesh and S. Tit man, “Profitability of Momentum Strategies: An Evaluation of Alternative Explanations,” Journal of Finance, 56(2) (2001): 699–720.

20

SIGNIFICANT DEVIATIONS FROM INTRINSIC VALUE

91

become low-performing stocks of the future. The same effect may also
be responsible for well-known patterns such as the low returns some
companies demonstrate following their IPOs and seasoned offerings.21 Typically, companies issuing new stock previously demonstrated strong business
performance, which in turn provides a reason to exploit a favorable track
record and issue stock.22
Next, momentum can be explained by systematic underreaction: Overly
conservative investors are too slow in adjusting their expectations after new
information becomes available. Investors may underestimate the true impact of earnings changes, divestitures, share repurchases, and so on.23 The
result is that stock prices do not instantaneously react to good or bad news.
This could give rise to short-term momentum in stock returns in which
stocks that have outperformed the market as a whole for several months
continue to do so over the next couple of months.
But academics are still debating whether irrationality among investors
is truly what drives the long-term reversal and short-term momentum patterns found in stock returns. Eugene Fama and Kenneth French,24 for example, believe that long-term reversals can be explained by risk premiums
driven by market-to-book ratio and size. These can be interpreted as indicators of liquidity or distress risk, in addition to the traditional market or beta
risk.25 In Chapter 10, we discuss how such additional risk premiums can affect the cost of capital.
Similarly, short-term momentum in share price returns is not necessarily driven by irrational investors. Profits from these patterns are relatively
limited after deducting transaction costs.26 Thus, these small momentum
biases could exist even if all investors were rational.
Furthermore, behavioral finance cannot yet explain why investors overreact under some conditions (such as IPOs) and underreact in others (such
21
See, for example, J. Ritter, “The Long Run Performance of Initial Public Offerings,” Journal of
Finance, 46(1) (1991): 3 –28; T. Loughran and J. Ritter, “The New Issues Puzzle,” Journal of Finance, 50(1) (1995): 23 –51; and B. Dharan and D. Ikenberry, “The Long-Run Negative Drift of
Post-Listing Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance, 50(5) (1995): 1547–1574.
22
E. Fama, “Market Efficiency, Long-Term Returns, and Behavioral Finance,” Journal of Financial Economics, 49(3) (1998): 283 –306.
23
Documented by V. Bernard and J. Thomas, “Evidence That Stock Prices Do Not Fully Ref lect
the Implications of Current Earnings for Future Earnings,” Journal of Accounting and Economics,
3(4) (1990): 305 –340; J. Lakonishok and T. Vermaelen, “Anomalous Price Behavior around Repurchase Tender Offers,” Journal of Finance, 45(2) (1990): 455 – 478; and H. Desai and P. Jain,
“Long-Run Common Stock Returns Following Stock Splits and Reverse Splits,” Journal of Business, 70(3) (1997): 409– 433.
24
E. Fama and F. French, “Multifactor Explanation of Asset Pricing Anomalies,” Journal of Finance, 51(1) (1996): 55 –84.
25
See, for example, J. Cochrane, Asset Pricing (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001):
ch. 20.
26
Cochrane, ibid., argues that momentum can be explained by a very small autocorrelation in
stock returns combined with high volatility and that momentum predictability is too small to
be exploited when transaction costs are taken into account.

92

DO FUNDAMENTALS REALLY DRIVE THE STOCK MARKET?

Exhibit 4.15 Market Value of 3Com Compared to the Value of
PalmOne Ownership by 3Com
$ billion

60

Future
separation
announced

5%
carve-out

Full
spin-off

50
PalmOne
40

30

20

3Com

10

0
Dec-98

Jun-99

Dec-99

Jun-00

Dec-00

Source: Datastream.

as earnings announcements). Fama considers this puzzle a further indication that markets are efficient: There is no systematic way to predict when
markets will over- or underreact.27 Across all studies, the expected value of
an abnormal return is therefore probably still zero. This would imply that
managers should still make their decisions based on traditional DCF analyses and efficient-market assumptions.

Persistent Mispricing in Carve-Outs and Dual-Listed Companies
One type of market deviation often suggested to support the validity of behavioral finance is the mispricing of carve-outs and dual-listed companies
(see Chapter 16 for more details on carve-outs). A well-documented example
is the relative pricing of 3Com versus Palm after the Palm carve-out in March
2000. 3Com had floated 5 percent of its subsidiary Palm in anticipation of a
complete spin-off within nine months. Yet immediately after the Palm carveout, the market capitalization of Palm was higher than the entire market value
of 3Com, implying that 3Com’s other businesses had negative value (see Exhibit 4.15). Given the size and profitability of their other businesses, this observation clearly implies mispricing. So why did rational investors not exploit
27
E. Fama, “Market Efficiency, Long-Term Returns, and Behavioral Finance,” Journal of Financial Economics, 49(3) (1998): 283 –306.

SIGNIFICANT DEVIATIONS FROM INTRINSIC VALUE

93

the mispricing by going short in Palm shares and long in 3Com shares? They
could not, because the free float of Palm shares was too small after the carveout: 95 percent of all shares were still held by 3Com. Establishing a short position in Palm would have required borrowing the shares from a Palm
shareholder. As the share supply via short sales increased steadily over the
months following the carve-out, the mispricing gradually decreased.28
Additional cases of mispricing for parent companies and their carvedout subsidiaries have been documented.29 These cases involve similar difficulties in setting up short positions to exploit price differences. This in turn
allows mispricing to persist for several weeks or months until the spin-off
takes place or is abandoned. These examples expose price differences that
appear to be inconsistent with efficient markets (at least in the sense that
relevant price information was not quickly and correctly processed). In all
cases, however, these price differences resolved within several months.
Another classic example is the price disparity between the shares of
Royal Dutch Petroleum and Shell Transport &Trading (T&T), which are separately traded in the Amsterdam and London stock markets, respectively.
These twin shares are entitled to a fixed 6040 portion of the dividends of
the combined Royal Dutch/Shell Group. Thus, one would expect that the
prices of the Royal Dutch and Shell T&T shares would be priced in a fixed
ratio of 6040.
Over long periods, however, this has not been the case.30 In fact, for several similar twin-share structures (such as Unilever and Reed-Elsevier),
there have been prolonged periods of mispricing, as shown in Exhibit 4.16
on page 94. This phenomenon occurs because, for some reason, investors
prefer one of the twin shares over the other and are prepared to pay a premium. The arbitrage opportunity from going short in the overpriced share
and going long in the underpriced share is not exploited by rational investors. Not only have such price differentials persisted, they have sometimes been as large as 30 percent. One explanation is that because of noise
trader risk, the arbitrage opportunity around dual-listed stocks is actually a
risky strategy.31 Arbitrage investors cannot be sure that prices will converge
in the near term; the price gap could even widen.
Does this indict the market’s ability to price? We do not think so. In recent years, the price differences for Royal Dutch and stocks with similar
28

See J. Cochrane, “Stocks as Money: Convenience Yield and the Tech-Stock Bubble” (NBER
working paper no. 8987, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2002).
29
O. Lamont and R. Thaler, “Can the Market Add and Subtract? Mispricing in Tech Stock CarveOuts,” Journal of Political Economy, 111(2) (2003): 227–268; and M. Mitchell, T. Pulvino, and
E. Stafford, “Limited Arbitrage in Equity Markets,” Journal of Finance, 57(2) (2002): 551–584.
30
K. Froot and A. Perold, “Global Equity Markets: The Case of Royal Dutch and Shell,” Harvard
Business School Case 9-296-077; and K. Froot and E. Dabora, “How Are Stock Prices Affected
by the Location of Trade?” Journal of Financial Economics, 53(2) (1999): 189–216.
31
A. de Jong, L. Rosenthal, and M. van Dijk, “The Limits of Arbitrage: Evidence from DualListed Companies” (EFA 2004 Maastricht Meetings paper no. 4695).

94

DO FUNDAMENTALS REALLY DRIVE THE STOCK MARKET?

Exhibit 4.16 Share Price Disparity of Dual-Listed Companies
Relative difference in valuation, percent
Royal Dutch Petroleum NV relative to Shell T&T PLC

Unilever NV relative to Unilever PLC

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

–10

–10

–20

–20

–30

–30

–40
Jan-73

Jan-83

Jan-93

Jan-03

–40
Jan-73

Jan-83

Jan-93

Jan-03

Source: Datastream.

underlying Anglo-Dutch corporate structures all appear to have shrunk.
Furthermore, some of these twin-share structures have disappeared as the
corporations formally merged, as Royal Dutch and Shell T&T did on October 28, 2004, in announcing the unification of their shares. The disappearance of price differences upon such unification announcements underlines
the importance of noise trader risk. As soon as a formal date was set for definitive price convergence, arbitrageurs stepped in to correct any difference.32 It also underlines the argument that mispricing occurs under
special circumstances only—and is by no means a common or long-lasting
phenomenon.

Markets and Fundamentals: The Bubble of the 1990s
So do markets reflect economic fundamentals? We believe they do. To verify this conclusion, we estimated the intrinsic valuation level for the U.S.
stock market as a whole, based on economic fundamentals, using an
equity DCF valuation model. This model is an extended, two-stage version
of the value driver formula first presented in Chapter 3 (see Chapter 9
for more details).33 By using a two-stage model, we could accommodate
32
See de Jong, Rosenthal, and van Dijk, “The Limits of Arbitrage: Evidence from Dual-Listed
Companies.” (Note 31)
33
In the standard value driver formula, we just replace ROIC with return on equity and WACC
with cost of equity to obtain the market-to-book ratio of equity instead of invested capital.

SIGNIFICANT DEVIATIONS FROM INTRINSIC VALUE

95

both long-term economic fundamentals and short-term fluctuations in
key value drivers.
To analyze the valuation levels for the stock market as whole, we forecast each key value driver, such as return on equity (ROE) and growth
using economic fundamentals of the entire U.S. economy. For the first stage
of the model, we used the actual return on equity, GDP growth, and cost of
equity for the year in which we applied the model. In the second stage of
the valuation model, we used long-term fundamental values as estimates
for the ROE, growth, and cost of equity. Long-term return on equity and
growth in the U.S. economy have been remarkably stable for the past 40
years, despite some deep recessions and periods of strong economic
growth. The median return on equity for all U.S. companies has been a stable 12 to 15 percent. Long-term gross domestic product (GDP) growth for
the U.S. economy has been about 3 percent per year in real terms since
1945.34 When measured using five- or seven-year rolling averages, it has not
deviated significantly from that level in any subperiod. In a separate analysis, we estimated that the inflation-adjusted cost of equity since 1962 has
been fairly stable at about 61⁄2 to 7 percent.35 Using the two-stage DCF valuation model, we estimated the price-to-earnings and market-to-book ratios
for the U.S. stock market for each year between 1962 and 2003 (see Exhibit
4.17 on page 96).36 We did a similar analysis for the U.K. stock market and
obtained similar results.
Overall, we were surprised by how well this simple, fundamental valuation model fits the stock market’s price-to-earnings levels over the past
three decades, despite periods of extremely high economic growth in the
1960s and 1990s, as well as periods of low growth and high inflation in the
1970s and 1980s. Over the long term, the stock market as a whole appears to
follow the simple, fundamental economic laws discussed in Chapter 3:
Value is driven by returns on capital, growth, and—via the cost of capital—
interest rates.
This has led us to three important conclusions: First, by and large, the
stock markets in the United States and the United Kingdom have been fairly
priced and have oscillated around their intrinsic price-to-earnings ratios.
The intrinsic P/E ratio was typically near 15, with the exception of the highinflation years of the late 1970s and early 1980s, when it was closer to 10.
Second, the late 1970s and late 1990s did indeed produce significant deviations from intrinsic value. In the late 1970s, as investors were obsessed
34
For the U.S. economy, corporate earnings as a percentage of GDP have been remarkably constant over the past 40 years at around 6 percent.
35
For estimates of the inf lation-adjusted cost of equity for the stock market as a whole, see
Chapter 10 and M. Goedhart, T. Koller, and Z. Williams, “The Real Cost of Equity,” McKinsey on
Finance, 5 (Autumn 2002): 11–15.
36
See M. Goedhart, T. Koller, and Z. Williams, “Living with Lower Market Expectations,”
McKinsey on Finance, 8 (Summer 2003): 7–11.

96

DO FUNDAMENTALS REALLY DRIVE THE STOCK MARKET?

Exhibit 4.17 Estimating Fundamental Market Valuation Levels
25

Actual P/E1

20

15

Predicted P/E1

10

5

0
1962

1966

1970

1974

1978

1982

1986

1990

1994

1998

2002

1

Twelve-month forward-looking price-to-earnings ratio.
Source: IBES, McKinsey.

with high short-term inflation rates, the market was probably valued too
conservatively. Based on long-term real GDP growth and returns on equity,
the stock market should not have dropped to a P/E level of 7. The other obvious deviation occurred in the late 1990s, when the market valuation rose
to a P/E ratio near 25. Such a level for the 12-month forward-looking P/E
ratio could not be justified by a long-term real GDP growth of 3 percent and
returns on equity of 12 to 15 percent.
Finally, when such deviations occurred, the stock market corrected itself within a few years to its intrinsic valuation level. Thus, although market valuations can apparently be wrong from time to time—even for the
stock market as a whole—market valuations return to values justified by
economic fundamentals.
When analyzing the relative valuation for the stock market as a whole,
keep in mind that during the market bubble of the late 1990s, a limited
number of companies with extremely large market capitalizations and extremely high multiples had an enormous impact on the (weighted average)
price-to-earnings ratio for the S&P 500 (see Exhibit 4.18). The 12-month
trailing P/E ratio for the S&P 500 was about 30 in 1999, whereas the average
P/E ratio for almost 95 percent of the constituent companies was only 23.
This difference in P/E ratios emerged during the boom of the late 1990s and
disappeared by 2001.
Most of these large-capitalization companies with high P/E ratios were
clustered in just three sectors: technology, media, and telecommunications

SIGNIFICANT DEVIATIONS FROM INTRINSIC VALUE

97

Exhibit 4.18 Impact of Largest Stocks on Overall Market Valuation
1980

1990

1999

P/E of 30 largest companies

9

15

P/E of remaining companies

9

15

P/E for S&P overall

9

15

2001
46

23

28

24

30

25

Note: Twelve-month trailing price-to-earnings ratios.
Source: Compustat, McKinsey analysis.

(TMT). In most other U.S. sectors, P/E ratios were significantly lower. Thus,
the American stock market bubble of the late 1990s was largely driven by the
valuation of the so-called TMT sectors. To illustrate how aggressively investors were valuing the share prices of some of these TMT stocks, we analyzed the value of the 10 highest market capitalization U.S. technology
companies. At the end of 1999, these 10 companies had a combined market
capitalization of $2.4 trillion, annual revenues of $240 billion, and net income
of $37 billion, resulting in an aggregate price-earnings ratio of 64 times. We
built a simple DCF model to estimate what performance would be required
to justify that market value. For investors to earn an 11 percent return, these
companies would have needed to grow their revenues to approximately $2.7
trillion by 2014 and their net income to about $450 billion. To put this in perspective, assuming that GDP grows at a healthy rate from 1999 through 2014
and corporate profits remain a stable share of GDP (as they have for at least
the past 80 years), the total corporate profits of all U.S. companies would be
about $1.3 to $1.5 trillion by 2014. So these 10 companies would need to earn
about one-third of all the profits earned by all U.S. companies.
One would expect rational investors to try to exploit these cases of
likely mispricing. But setting up a short position in overpriced stocks is
not always easy, and can be costly and risky. The risk arises because although some investors may have recognized, for example, that these companies were overpriced, it was far from clear when this mispricing would
disappear. An investor with a short position in these companies would
need sufficient liquid assets to maintain the position and patiently sit
through possible periods of even deeper mispricing. We know of one experienced investor who set up a short position on an overvalued high-tech
stock only to abandon that position at a considerable loss when the share

98

DO FUNDAMENTALS REALLY DRIVE THE STOCK MARKET?

price continued to increase. Just three months after this investor exited his
short position, the share price plummeted.

Fundamentals Prevail
The empirical evidence in this chapter demonstrates that stock markets
largely reflect economic fundamentals. To be sure, markets can sometimes
be off, but such situations do not last. Sooner or later, the market will revert
to fundamental levels.
In the vast majority of cases, the deviations are quickly traded away
(think of how accurately call options, futures, and other derivatives are
priced relative to the underlying stocks, interest rates, or currency rates).
While in certain cases, these deviations might persist for months or even
years, there ultimately will be sufficient liquidity from rational investors for
stock prices to revert to their intrinsic value. In the examples of Royal
Dutch/Shell, Unilever, and Reed-Elsevier twin shares, the price differentials
decreased significantly or even disappeared. In the 3Com/Palm example,
the mispricing disappeared after two months. In the market bubble of the
1990s, the deviation from intrinsic value corrected itself in about three years.
In the end, market value reverts to levels justified by the underlying
economic fundamentals—and why not? Irrational investors may cause
stock prices to deviate temporarily from intrinsic value, but prices are driven by rational investors with deep pockets, who recognize economic fundamentals because they are focused on the long-term potential of stocks to
generate cash dividends.

IMPLICATIONS OF MARKET (IN)EFFICIENCY FOR
CORPORATE MANAGERS
Some managers point to evidence of the stock market’s inefficiencies to justify a belief that the market behaves irrationally. As evidence, these managers offer the inefficiencies that academics cite, and make the case that
arguments supporting the discounted cash flow approach do not square
with the real world. Although markets can indeed be inefficient, in the
sense that prices sometimes deviate from fundamentals, this does not make
discounted cash flow valuation superfluous.
For investors, market deviations may represent an opportunity to make
money depending on the practical difficulties and risks of setting up an arbitrage position. Once these inefficiencies become known, however, they
usually disappear, and the search is on for new ones.37 Evidence suggests
37

See, for example, S. Ross, “Neoclassical Finance, Alternative Finance and the Closed End
Fund Puzzle,” European Financial Management, 8(2) (2002): 129–137.

IMPLICATIONS OF MARKET (IN)EFFICIENCY

99

that no investment fund has been able to systematically outperform the
market as a whole over the past 35 years.38 Thus, it appears that the market
inefficiencies are not frequent or significant enough to provide investors
with systematic excess returns over longer periods.
Paradoxically, given such market deviations, it is even more important
for corporate managers and investors to understand the true, intrinsic value
of companies. This allows them to exploit any market deviations—if and
when they occur. Here are some examples of how corporate managers can
benefit from intrinsic value deviations by better timing the implementation
of strategic decisions.
• Issuing additional share capital at times when the stock market is
attaching too high a value to the company’s shares relative to intrinsic value
• Repurchasing company shares when the stock market underprices
relative to the intrinsic value
• Paying for acquisitions with shares instead of cash when the stock
market overprices the shares relative to intrinsic value
• Divesting particular businesses at times when trading and transaction multiples in that sector are higher than can be justified by underlying fundamentals
Two caveats are important to note in these examples. First, we would
not recommend basing a decision to issue or repurchase stock, divest or acquire businesses, or settle in cash or shares for transactions exclusively on a
perceived difference between market value and intrinsic value. Instead,
these decisions should be grounded in a sound strategic and business rationale that is expected to create value for shareholders. Market deviations are
more relevant as tactical considerations regarding the timing and execution
details of such decisions—that is, when to issue additional capital or how to
pay for a particular transaction.
Second, managers should be critical of analyses claiming to find such
market deviations for their company’s shares. After careful analysis, most
of the alleged deviations that we have come across in our client experience
turned out to be insignificant or even nonexistent. Market deviations are
typically rare and short-lived. Thus, the evidence for deviations should be
compelling before managers act on it. They should be significant in both
size and duration, given the cost and time to execute strategic decisions.
As long as your company’s share price will eventually return to its longrun, intrinsic DCF value, you should use the DCF approach for strategic
38
M. Rubinstein, “Rational Markets: Yes or No? The Affirmative Case,” Financial Analyst Journal,
57(3) (2001): 15 –29.

100

DO FUNDAMENTALS REALLY DRIVE THE STOCK MARKET?

decisions. What matters is the long-term behavior of your company’s share
price, not whether it is 5 or 10 percent undervalued this week. For strategic
business decisions, the evidence strongly suggests that the market uses the
DCF approach and reflects intrinsic value. Managers who use the DCF approach to valuation, with their focus on increasing long-term free cash flow,
ultimately will be rewarded with higher share prices. The evidence from
the market is conclusive. Devoting naive attention to accounting earnings or
systematically ignoring price signals by the stock market too often leads to
value-destroying decisions.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Define market efficiency.
2. Are financial markets efficient? Provide support for your contention.
3. Chapter 1 included a discussion of the importance of short-term versus long-term financial metrics. Chapter 4 extends this discussion.
Discuss the relative importance of the short-term versus the longterm debate with respect to stock value. Does the market focus on
the short term or the long term? Provide support for your contention.
4. Many corporate executives focus on NI, EPS, ROI, dividends, and
growth rates. In doing so, these executives attempt to manage balance sheet and income statement accounts in order to meet analysts’
expectations. Is a manager able to successfully manage these accounts to protect stock price and value?
5. Explain how changing from LIFO to FIFO might lead to a change to
DCF value.
6. Under what conditions might the market fail to reflect economic fundamentals?
7. Identify the basic economic laws that direct market behavior. What
evidence exists that supports the existence of these laws?

Part Two

Core Valuation Techniques

5
Frameworks for Valuation

In Part One, we built a conceptual framework to show what drives value. In
particular, a company’s value is driven, first, by its ability to earn a return
on invested capital (ROIC) greater than its weighted average cost of capital
(WACC), and second, by its ability to grow. High returns and growth result
in high cash flows, which in turn drives value.
Part Two offers a step-by-step guide for analyzing and valuing a company in practice, including technical details for properly measuring and interpreting the drivers of value. This chapter provides a high-level summary
of valuation models based on discounted cash flow (DCF). We show how
these models lead to identical results when applied correctly, and we illustrate how they differ in their ease of implementation.
Among the many ways to value a company (see Exhibit 5.1 on page 104
for an overview), we focus on two: enterprise DCF and discounted economic profit. When applied correctly, both valuation methods yield the
same results; however, each model has certain benefits in practice. Enterprise DCF remains the favorite of many practitioners and academics because it relies solely on the flow of cash in and out of the company, rather
than on accounting-based earnings (which can be misleading). Discounted
economic profit is gaining in popularity because of its close link to economic theory and competitive strategy. Economic profit highlights whether
a company is earning its cost of capital in a given year. Given the methods’
identical results and complementary benefits of interpretation, we use both
enterprise DCF and economic profit when valuing a company.
Both the enterprise DCF and economic profit models discount future
streams at the weighted average cost of capital. WACC-based models work
best when a company maintains a relatively stable debt-to-value ratio. If a
company’s debt-to-value mix is expected to change, WACC-based models can
103

104

FRAMEWORKS FOR VALUATION

Exhibit 5.1 Frameworks for DCF-Based Valuation
Model
Enterprise
discounted cash
flow

Measure
Free cash flow

Discount factor
Weighted average
cost of capital

Assessment
Works best for projects, business units, and
companies that manage their capital structure
to a target level.

Economic profit

Economic profit

Weighted average
cost of capital

Explicitly highlights when a company creates
value.

Adjusted present
value

Free cash flow

Unlevered cost of
equity

Highlights changing capital structure more
easily than WACC-based models.

Capital cash flow

Capital cash flow

Unlevered cost of
equity

Compresses free cash flow and the interest tax
shield in one number, making it difficult to
compare performance among companies and
over time.

Equity cash flow

Cash flow to equity Levered cost of
equity

Difficult to implement correctly because
capital structure is embedded within cash flow.
Best used when valuing financial institutions.

still yield accurate results but are more difficult to apply. When the company’s capital structure is expected to change significantly, we recommend
an alternative: adjusted present value (APV). Unlike WACC-based models,
APV values the cash flow associated with capital structure (e.g., tax shields)
separately from the cost of capital.
We conclude the chapter with a discussion of capital cash flow and equity cash flow valuation models. Because these two valuation models commingle operating performance and capital structure in cash flow, they lead
more easily to mistakes in implementation. For this reason, we avoid capital
cash flow and equity cash flow valuation models, except when valuing financial institutions, where capital structure is considered part of operations (for how to value financial institutions, see Chapter 25).

ENTERPRISE DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW MODEL
Enterprise valuation models value the company’s operating cash flows. Equity valuation models, in contrast, value only the equity holder’s claim
against operating cash flows. In the 1950s, two Nobel laureates, Franco
Modigliani and Merton Miller, postulated that the value of a company’s
economic assets must equal the value of the claims against those assets.

ENTERPRISE DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW MODEL

105

Exhibit 5.2 Enterprise Valuation of a Single-Business Company
$ million
Discount free cash
flow by the
weighted average
cost of capital

Free cash flow from operations

=
427.5
Enterprise
value

110

140

180
100

120

427.5
Debt
value¹
200.0

After-tax cash flow to debt holders

70
20
Equity
value
227.5

Economic
assets
generate
operating
cash flow

65

110

15

+
Financial
claims on the
company’s
operating
cash flow

Cash flow to equity holders

90

Year 1

70

85

2

3

55

70

4

5

¹Debt value equals discounted after-tax cash flow to debt holders plus present value of interest tax shield.

Thus, if we want to value the equity (and shares) of a company, we have two
choices. We can value the company’s operations and subtract the value of all
nonequity financial claims (e.g., debt), or we can value the equity cash flows
directly. In Exhibit 5.2, we demonstrate the relation between enterprise
value and equity value. For this single-business company, equity can be calculated either directly at $227.5 million or by estimating enterprise value
($427.5 million) and subtracting debt ($200.0 million).
Although both methods lead to identical results when applied correctly,
the equity method is difficult to implement in practice; matching equity
cash flows with the correct cost of equity is challenging (for more on this,
see the section on equity valuation later in this chapter). Consequently, to
value a company’s equity, we recommend valuing the enterprise first and
then subtracting the value of any nonequity financial claims.1
In addition, the enterprise method is especially valuable when extended to a multibusiness company. As shown in Exhibit 5.3 on page 106,
the enterprise value equals the summed value of the individual operating
1
For financial institutions, such as banks and insurance companies, the choice, size, and structure of financial claims are directly linked to the company’s operations (and thus are difficult
to separate). In these situations, we prefer the equity cash-f low method. The valuation of financial institutions is addressed in Chapter 25.

106

FRAMEWORKS FOR VALUATION

Exhibit 5.3 Enterprise Valuation of a Multibusiness Company
$ million
Unit C
272.5

(70.0)
40.0

427.5

(200.0)

227.5
Unit B
50.0
Unit A
135.0

Value of operating units

Corporate Excess Enterprise Value of
center
cash
value
debt

Equity
value

units less the present value of the corporate center costs, plus the value of
nonoperating assets. Using enterprise discounted cash flow, instead of the
equity cash flow model, enables you to value individual projects, business
units, and even the entire company with a consistent methodology.
To value a company’s common stock using enterprise DCF:
1. Value the company’s operations by discounting free cash flow from
operations at the weighted average cost of capital.
2. Value nonoperating assets, such as excess marketable securities, nonconsolidated subsidiaries, and other equity investments. Combining
the value of operating assets and nonoperating assets leads to enterprise value.
3. Identify and value all nonequity financial claims against the company’s assets. Nonequity financial claims include (among others)
fixed- and floating-rate debt, pension shortfalls, employee options,
and preferred stock.
4. Subtract the value of nonequity financial claims from enterprise
value to determine the value of common stock. To determine share
price, divide equity value by the number of shares outstanding.
Exhibit 5.4 presents the results of an enterprise DCF valuation for
Home Depot, the world’s largest retailer of home improvement products.

ENTERPRISE DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW MODEL

107

Exhibit 5.4 Home Depot: Enterprise DCF Valuation

Year
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Continuing value
Present value of cash flow

Free cash
flow (FCF)
($ million)
1,930
2,219
2,539
2,893
3,283
3,711
4,180
4,691
5,246
5,849
133,360

Discount
factor
(@ 9.3%)
0.915
0.837
0.766
0.700
0.641
0.586
0.536
0.491
0.449
0.411
0.411

Present
value of FCF
($ million)
1,766
1,857
1,944
2,026
2,104
2,175
2,241
2,301
2,355
2,402
54,757
75,928

Mid-year adjustment factor
Value of operations

1.046
79,384

Value of excess cash
Value of other nonoperating assets
Enterprise value

1,609
84
81,077

Value of debt
Value of capitalized operating leases
Equity value

(1,365)
(6,554)
73,158

Number of shares (at fiscal year-end 2003, million)
Estimated share value (in dollars)

2,257
32.41

To value Home Depot, future free cash flow is discounted to today’s value
and then summed across years. For simplicity, the first year’s cash flow is
discounted by one full year, the second by two full years, and so on. Since
cash flows are generated throughout the year, and not as a lump sum, discounting in full-year increments understates the appropriate discount factor. Therefore, we adjust the present value by half a year,2 leading to the
value of operations of $79.4 billion.
To this value, add nonoperating assets (e.g., excess cash and other longterm nonoperating assets) to estimate Home Depot’s enterprise value ($81.1
billion). From enterprise value, subtract the present value of nonequity
2

A half-year adjust ment is made to the present value for Home Depot because we assume cash
f low is generated symmetrically around the midyear point. For companies dependent on yearend holidays, cash f lows will be more heavily weighted toward the latter half of the year. In this
case the adjust ment should be smaller.

108

FRAMEWORKS FOR VALUATION

claims (traditional debt and capitalized operating leases) to arrive at Home
Depot’s estimated equity value ($73.2 billion). Dividing the equity value by
the number of shares outstanding (2.3 billion) leads to an estimate of share
value of $32.41. During the first half of 2004, Home Depot’s stock price
traded in the mid 30s.

Valuing Operations
The value of operations equals the discounted value of future free cash
flow. Free cash flow equals the cash flow generated by the company’s operations, less any reinvestment back into the business. Free cash flow is the
cash flow available to all investors, and is independent of leverage. Consistent
with this definition, free cash flow must be discounted using the weighted
average cost of capital. The WACC is the company’s opportunity cost of
funds and represents a blended required return by the company’s debt and
equity holders.
Over the next few pages, we outline the enterprise DCF valuation process. Although we present it sequentially, valuation is an iterative process.
To value operations, we analyze the company’s historical performance;
define and project free cash flow over the short, medium, and long run;
and discount the projected free cash flows at the weighted average cost
of capital.

Analyzing historical performance Before projecting future cash flow, examine the company’s historical financial performance. A good analysis will
focus on the key drivers of value: return on invested capital, growth, and
free cash flow. By thoroughly analyzing the past, we can document whether
the company has created value, whether it has grown, and how it compares
with its competitors.
Although ROIC and FCF are critical to the valuation process, they cannot be computed directly from a company’s reported financial statements.
Whereas ROIC and FCF are intended to measure the company’s operating
performance, financial statements mix operating performance, nonoperating performance, and capital structure. Therefore, to calculate ROIC and
FCF, first reorganize the accountant’s financial statements into new statements that separate operating items, nonoperating items, and financial
structure.
This reorganization leads to two new terms: invested capital and net
operating profits less adjusted taxes (NOPLAT). Invested capital represents
the investor capital required to fund operations, without distinguishing
how the capital is financed. NOPLAT represents the total after-tax operating income generated by the company’s invested capital, available to all financial investors.

ENTERPRISE DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW MODEL

109

Exhibit 5.5 presents the historical NOPLAT and invested capital for
Home Depot and one of its direct competitors, Lowe’s. To calculate
ROIC, divide NOPLAT by average invested capital. In 2003, Home Depot’s
return on invested capital equaled 18.2 percent ( based on a two-year average of invested capital), which exceeds its weighted average cost of capital
of 9.3 percent. A detailed discussion of invested capital and NOPLAT, as
well as an in-depth historical examination of Home Depot and Lowe’s, is
presented in Chapter 7.
Next, use the reorganized financial statements to calculate free cash
flow, which will be the basis for our valuation. Defined in a manner consistent with ROIC, free cash flow relies on NOPLAT and the change in invested capital. Unlike the accountant’s cash flow statement (provided in the
company’s annual report), free cash flow is independent of nonoperating
items and capital structure.
Exhibit 5.6 on page 110 presents historical free cash flow for both Home
Depot and Lowe’s. As seen in the exhibit, Home Depot is generating nearly

Exhibit 5.5 Home Depot & Lowe’s: Historical ROIC Analysis
$ million
Home Depot

Lowe’s

Net sales
Cost of merchandise sold
Selling, general and administrative
Depreciation
Operating lease interest
Adjusted EBITA

2001
53,553
(37,406)
(10,451)
(756)
288
5,228

2002
58,247
(40,139)
(11,375)
(895)
260
6,098

2003
64,816
(44,236)
(12,658)
(1,075)
276
7,123

2001
22,111
(15,743)
(4,053)
(517)
106
1,904

2002
26,491
(18,465)
(4,859)
(626)
106
2,647

2003
30,838
(21,231)
(5,671)
(758)
114
3,292

Adjusted taxes
NOPLAT

(2,020)
3,208

(2,117)
3,981

(2,040)
5,083

(654)
1,250

(825)
1,822

(1,069)
2,223

Invested capital
Operating working capital
Net property and equipment
Capitalized operating leases
Net other assets
Invested capital (excluding goodwill)

2,552
15,375
5,459
(216)
23,170

2,746
17,168
5,890
(247)
25,557

2,674
20,063
6,554
(524)
28,767

1,634
8,653
2,189
134
12,611

1,451
10,352
2,373
145
14,321

1,363
11,945
2,762
211
16,281

419
46

575
54

833
55

0
730

0
730

0
730

23,635

26,185

29,655

13,341

15,051

17,012

14.5%
14.3%

16.3%
16.0%

18.7%
18.2%

10.9%
10.3%

13.5%
12.8%

14.5%
13.9%

Acquired intangibles and goodwill
Cumulative amortization and
unreported goodwill
Invested capital (including goodwill)
ROIC excluding goodwill (average)
ROIC including goodwill (average)

110

FRAMEWORKS FOR VALUATION

Exhibit 5.6 Home Depot and Lowe’s: Historical Free Cash Flow
$ million
Home Depot

Lowe’s

2001
3,208
756
3,964

2002
3,981
895
4,876

2003
5,083
1,075
6,157

2001
1,250
517
1,767

2002
1,822
626
2,448

2003
2,223
758
2,981

Investment in operating working capital
834
Net capital expenditures
(3,063)
Investment in capitalized operating leases
(775)
Investments in intangibles and goodwill
(113)
Decrease (increase) in other operating assets
105
Increase (decrease) in accumulated other
(153)
comprehensive income
Gross investment
(3,165)

(194)
(2,688)
(430)
(164)
31
138

72
(3,970)
(664)
(259)
277
172

(203)
(2,135)
(547)
0
(7)
3

183
(2,325)
(184)
0
(11)
0

88
(2,351)
(389)
0
(66)
0

(3,307)

(4,372)

(2,889)

(2,336)

(2,719)

Free cash flow

799

1,569

1,785

1,122

112

262

After-tax interest income
Decrease (increase) in excess cash
Decrease (increase) in nonoperating assets
Discontinued operations

33
(1,509)
9
0

49
383
(24)
0

36
(473)
23
0

15
(321)
13
0

13
(189)
(7)
0

9
(415)
(140)
15

Cash flow available to investors

(668)

1,977

1,371

(1,415)

(71)

(268)

2001
17
177
88
(775)

2002
23
162
140
(430)

2003
38
170
(44)
(664)

2001
123
66
(903)
(547)

2002
125
65
78
(184)

2003
121
71
60
(389)

(492)

(105)

(500)

(1,261)

85

(138)

Dividends
Net shares repurchased (issued)
Flows to equity holders

396
(572)
(176)

492
1,590
2,082

595
1,276
1,871

60
(213)
(154)

66
(222)
(156)

87
(217)
(130)

Cash flow available to investors

(668)

1,977

1,371

(1,415)

(71)

(268)

NOPLAT
Depreciation
Gross cash flow

After-tax interest expense
After-tax lease interest expense
Decrease (increase) in debt
Decrease (increase) in capitalized
operating leases
Flows to debt holders

$2 billion in free cash flow, whereas Lowe’s free cash flow is barely positive. This isn’t necessarily a problem for Lowe’s. The company’s free cash
flow is small because it is reinvesting most of its gross cash flow to grow its
business.

Projecting revenue growth, ROIC, and free cash flow To build an enterprise DCF valuation, we project revenue growth, return on invested capital,
and free cash flow. Exhibit 5.7 graphs historical and projected ROIC and

ENTERPRISE DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW MODEL

111

Exhibit 5.7 ROIC and Revenue Growth Projections
percent
Historical

20

Forecast
Home Depot ROIC

15
Lowe’s ROIC
10
Home Depot WACC
5
0
1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

Historical

32

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2007

2009

2011

2013

Forecast
Lowe’s
revenue
growth

24
16

Home Depot
revenue growth

8
0
1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

revenue growth for Home Depot and Lowe’s. As the graphs demonstrate,
the two companies are transitioning from a period of high growth (25 percent annually) into mature businesses with strong ROICs (well above Home
Depot’s 9.3 percent cost of capital) and lower growth rates (currently 10 to
15 percent but falling to 5 percent over the next 10 years).
Free cash flow, which is driven by revenue growth and ROIC, provides
the basis for enterprise DCF valuation. Exhibit 5.8 on page 112 shows a
summarized free cash flow calculation for Home Depot.3 To forecast Home
Depot’s free cash flow, start with forecasts of NOPLAT and invested capital. Over the short run (the first few years), forecast all financial statement
line items, such as gross margin, selling expenses, accounts receivable,
and inventory. Moving farther out, individual line items become difficult
to project. Therefore, over the medium horizon (5 to 10 years), focus on the
company’s key value drivers, such as operating margin, adjusted tax rate,
and capital efficiency. At some point, even projecting key drivers on a
3

Free cash f low does not incorporate any financing-related cash f lows such as interest expense
or dividends. A good stress test for an enterprise valuation model is to change future interest
rates or dividend payout ratios and observe free cash f low. Free cash f low forecasts should not
change when you adjust the cost of debt or dividend policy.

112

FRAMEWORKS FOR VALUATION

Exhibit 5.8 Home Depot: Free Cash Flow Summary
$ million

NOPLAT
Depreciation
Gross cash flow
Investment in operating working capital
Net capital expenditures
Investment in capitalized operating leases
Investments in intangibles and goodwill
Decrease (increase) in other operating assets
Increase (decrease) in accumulated other
comprehensive income
Gross investment
Free cash flow

Historical
2001
3,208
756
3,964

2002
3,981
895
4,876

2003
5,083
1,075
6,157

Forecast
2004
5,185
1,193
6,378

2005
5,741
1,321
7,062

2006
6,342
1,459
7,801

834
(3,063)
(775)
(113)
105
(153)

(194)
(2,688)
(430)
(164)
31
138

72
(3,970)
(664)
(259)
277
172

(294)
(3,399)
(721)
(92)
58
0

(318)
(3,708)
(780)
(99)
62
0

(344)
(4,036)
(842)
(107)
67
0

(3,165)

(3,307)

(4,372)

(4,448)

(4,843)

(5,261)

799

1,569

1,785

1,930

2,219

2,539

year-by-year basis becomes meaningless. To value cash flows beyond this
point, use a continuing-value formula, described next.

Estimating continuing value At the point where predicting the individual
key value drivers on a year-by-year basis becomes impractical, do not vary
the individual drivers over time. Instead, use a perpetuity-based continuing value, such that:
Value of Operations =

Present Value of Free Cash Flow Present Value of Free Cash Flow
+
during Explicit Forecast Period
after Explicit Forecast Period

Although many continuing-value models exist, we prefer the key value
driver model presented in Chapter 3. The key value driver formula is superior to alternative methodologies because it is based on cash flow and links
cash flow to growth and ROIC. The key value driver formula is:

Continuing Valuet =

g 

NOPLATt+1  1 −


RONIC 
WACC − g

The formula requires a forecast of net operating profits less adjusted taxes
(NOPLAT) in the year following the explicit forecast period, the long-run

ENTERPRISE DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW MODEL

113

Exhibit 5.9 Home Depot: Continuing Value
$ million
12,415

NOPLAT 2014
Return on incremental invested capital (RONIC)

9.3%

NOPLAT growth rate in perpetuity (g)

4.0%

g 
NOPLATt+1 1 –
RONIC 
Continuing Valuet =
WACC – g

Weighted average cost of capital (WACC)

9.3%

= 133,360

forecast for return on new capital (RONIC), the weighted average cost of
capital (WACC), and long-run growth in NOPLAT (g).
Exhibit 5.9 presents an estimate for Home Depot’s continuing value.
Based on a final-year estimate of NOPLAT ($12.4 billion), return on new
investment equal to the cost of capital (9.3 percent), and a long-term
growth rate of 4 percent, the continuing value is estimated at $133.4 billion. This value is then discounted into today’s dollars and added to the
value from the explicit forecast period to determine Home Depot’s operating value (see Exhibit 5.4).
Alternative methods and additional details for estimating continuing
value are provided in Chapter 9.

Discounting free cash flow at the weighted average cost of capital To determine the value of operations, discount each year’s forecast of free cash
flow for time and risk. When you discount any set of cash flows, make sure
to define the cash flows and discount factor consistently. Since free cash
flows are available to all investors, the discount factor for free cash flow
must represent the risk faced by all investors. The weighted average cost of
capital (WACC) blends the required rates of return for debt (kd) and equity
(ke) based on their market-based target values. For a company financed
solely with debt and equity, the WACC is defined as follows:
WACC =

E
D
ke
kd (1 − Tm ) +
D+E
D+E

Note how the cost of debt has been reduced by the marginal tax rate (Tm).
We do this because the interest tax shield has been excluded from free cash
flow (remember, interest is tax deductible). Since the interest tax shield has
value, it must be incorporated in the valuation. Enterprise DCF values the
tax shield by reducing the weighted average cost of capital.
Why move the interest tax shields from free cash flow to the cost of capital? By calculating free cash flow as if the company were financed entirely

114

FRAMEWORKS FOR VALUATION

Exhibit 5.10 Home Depot: Weighted Average Cost of Capital
percent
Source of
capital
Debt
Equity
WACC

Proportion
of total
capital
8.3
91.7

Cost of
capital
4.7
9.9

Marginal
tax rate
38.2

100.0

After-tax
opportunity
cost
2.9
9.9

Contribution
to weighted
average
0.2
9.1
9.3

with equity, we can compare operating performance across companies and
over time without regard to capital structure. By focusing solely on operations, we can develop a cleaner picture of historical performance, and this
leads to better forecasting.
Although applying the weighted average cost of capital is intuitive and
relatively straightforward, it comes with some drawbacks. If you discount
all future cash flows with a constant cost of capital, as most analysts do,
you are implicitly assuming the company manages its capital structure to a
target rate. For example, if a company plans to increase its debt-to-value
ratio, the current cost of capital will understate the expected tax shields. Although the WACC can be adjusted for a changing capital structure, the process is complicated. In these situations, we recommend an alternative
method such as adjusted present value.
The weighted average cost of capital for Home Depot is presented in Exhibit 5.10. For simplicity, the cost of capital in this valuation is based on the
company’s current capital structure. Since Home Depot has very little debt,
the weighted average cost of capital (9.3 percent) is very close to Home
Depot’s cost of equity (9.9 percent). Chapter 10 provides a more formal discussion of WACC and its components.
This cost of capital is used to discount each year’s forecasted cash flow,
as well as the continuing value. The result is the value of operations.

Identifying and Valuing Nonoperating Assets
When measured properly, free cash flow from operations should not include any cash flows from nonoperating assets. Instead, nonoperating assets should be valued separately. Nonoperating assets can be segmented
into two groups, marketable securities and illiquid investments.

Excess cash and marketable securities Statement of Financial Accounting
Standards (SFAS) No. 115 (1993) and International Accounting Standards

ENTERPRISE DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW MODEL

115

(IAS) No. 39 (1998) require companies to report liquid debt and equity investments (e.g., excess cash and marketable securities) at a fair market value
on the company’s balance sheet.4 Therefore, when valuing liquid nonoperating assets, use their most recent reported balance sheet value, rather than
discount future nonoperating flows.

Illiquid investments, such as nonconsolidated subsidiaries When valuing
a company from the inside, you should value illiquid investments by using
enterprise DCF (i.e., project cash flow and discount at the appropriate cost
of capital). If you are valuing the company from the outside, valuation of
these assets is rough at best. Companies disclose very little information
about illiquid investments, such as discontinued operations, excess real estate, nonconsolidated subsidiaries, and other equity investments.
For nonconsolidated subsidiaries, information disclosure depends on
the level of ownership. When a company has some influence but not a controlling interest5 in another company, it records its portion of the subsidiary’s profits on its own income statement and the original investment
plus its portion of reinvested profits on its own balance sheet. Use this information to create a simple cash flow statement. To discount the cash flow,
use a cost of capital commensurate with the risk of the investment, not the
parent company’s cost of capital (this is why we recommend separation of
operating and nonoperating assets).
When ownership is less than 20 percent, investments are reported at
historical cost, and the company’s portion of profits is recorded only when
paid out to the parent. In most situations, you will see nothing more than
the investment’s original cost. In this case, use a multiple of the book value
or a tracking portfolio to value the investment. Further details for valuing
nonoperating assets are covered in Chapter 11.
Identifying and Valuing Nonequity Claims
Add the value of nonoperating assets to the value of operations to determine enterprise value. To estimate equity value, subtract any nonequity
claims, such as debt, unfunded retirement liabilities, capitalized operating
leases, and outstanding employee options. Common equity is a residual
claimant, receiving cash flows only after the company has fulfilled its
other contractual claims. In today’s increasingly complex financial markets, many claimants have rights to a company’s cash flow before equity

4

Liquid invest ments can appear as either current or long-term assets. Their placement depends
on when management intends to sell the assets.
5
In the United States and Europe, this is generally accepted as between 20 percent and 50 percent ownership.

116

FRAMEWORKS FOR VALUATION

holders—and they are not always easy to spot. Enron collapsed in 2001
under the weight of hidden debt. The company signed agreements with the
creditors of its nonconsolidated subsidiaries, promising to cover loan
payments if the subsidiaries could not.6 Since the subsidiaries were not
consolidated, the debt never appeared on Enron’s balance sheet, and investors dramatically overestimated the equity’s value. When the loans
were disclosed in November 2001, the company’s stock price fell by more
than 50 percent in a single week.
Here are the most common nonequity claims:
• Debt: If available, use the market value of all outstanding debt,
including fixed and floating rate debt. If that information is unavailable, the book value of debt is a reasonable proxy, unless the
probability of default is high or interest rates have changed dramatically since the debt was originally issued. Any valuation of debt,
however, should be consistent with your estimates of enterprise
value. (See Chapter 11 for more details.)
• Unfunded retirement liabilities: The recent weak performance of global
stock markets and the rising cost of health care have left many companies with retirement liabilities that are partially unfunded. Although the actual shortfall is not reported on the balance sheet (only
a smoothed amount is transferred to the balance sheet), the stock
market clearly values unfunded retirement liabilities as an offset
against enterprise value. Consider General Motors, which raised
nearly $20 billion in debt to fund its pension deficit. The company’s
stock price actually rose during the month when the new debt was
announced and issued. Investors knew a liability existed, even
though it wasn’t on the balance sheet.
• Operating leases: These represent the most common form of off-balancesheet debt. Under certain conditions, companies can avoid capitalizing leases as debt on their balance sheet, although required payments
must be disclosed in the footnotes.
• Contingent liabilities: Any other material off-balance-sheet contingencies, such as lawsuits and loan guarantees, will be reported in the
footnotes.
• Preferred stock: Although the name denotes equity, preferred stock in
well-established companies more closely resembles unsecured debt.
Therefore, preferred-stock dividends (which are often predetermined and required) should be valued separately, using an appropriate risk-adjusted discount rate.
6

D. Henry, “ Who Else Is Hiding Debt: Moving Financial Obligations into Off-Book Vehicles Is
Now a Common Ploy,” BusinessWeek ( January 2002), p. 36.

ENTERPRISE DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW MODEL

117

• Employee options: Each year, many companies offer their employees
compensation in the form of options. Since options give the employee
the right to buy company stock at a potentially discounted price, they
can have great value. Employee options can be valued using traditional models, such as Black-Scholes, or advanced techniques such as
lattice models.
• Minority interest: When a company controls a subsidiary but does not
own 100 percent, the investment must be consolidated on the parent
company’s balance sheet, and the funding other investors provide is
recognized on the parent company’s balance sheet as minority interest. When valuing minority interest, it is important to realize the minority interest holder does not have a claim on the company’s assets,
but rather a claim on the subsidiary’s assets. Thus, minority interest
must be valued separately and not as a percentage of company value.
The identification and valuation of nonequity financial claims are covered
in detail in Chapter 11.
A common mistake made when valuing companies is to double-count
claims already deducted from cash flow. Consider a company with a pension shortfall. You have been told the company will make extra payments to
eliminate the liability. If you deduct the present value of the liability from
enterprise value, you should not model the extra payments within free cash
flow; that would mean double-counting the shortfall (once in cash flow and
once as a claim), leading to an underestimate of equity value.

Valuing Equity
Once you have identified and valued all nonequity claims, we can subtract
the claims from enterprise value to determine equity value. Home Depot has
traditional debt ($1.4 billion) and capitalized operating leases ($6.6 billion).
To value Home Depot’s common stock, we subtract each of these claims from
Home Depot’s enterprise value (see Exhibit 5.4).
To determine Home Depot’s share price, divide the estimated commonstock value by the number of undiluted shares outstanding. Do not use diluted shares. We have already valued convertible debt and employee stock
options separately. If we were to use diluted shares, we would be doublecounting the options’ value.
At the end of fiscal year 2003, Home Depot had 2.3 billion shares outstanding. Dividing the equity estimate of $73.2 billion by 2.3 billion shares
generates an estimated value of $32 per share. The estimated share value assumes Home Depot can maintain its current ROIC over the forecast period
and the growth rate will remain strong, decaying gradually over the next 10
years from its current level of 11 percent to 4 percent in the continuing

118

FRAMEWORKS FOR VALUATION

value. During the first half of 2004, the Home Depot’s actual stock price
traded between $32 and $38 per share.

ECONOMIC-PROFIT-BASED VALUATION MODELS
The enterprise DCF model is a favorite of academics and practitioners
alike because it relies solely on how cash flows in and out of the company.
Complex accounting can be replaced with a simple question: Does cash
change hands? One shortfall of enterprise DCF, however, is that each
year’s cash flow provides little insight into the company’s performance.
Declining free cash flow can signal either poor performance or investment
for the future. The economic profit model highlights how and when the
company creates value yet leads to a valuation that is identical to that of
enterprise DCF.
As stated in Chapter 3, economic profit measures the value created by
the company in a single period and is defined as follows:
Economic Profit = Invested Capital × (ROIC − WACC)

Since ROIC equals NOPLAT divided by invested capital, we can rewrite the
equation as follows:
Economic Profit = NOPLAT − (Invested Capital × WACC)

In Exhibit 5.11, we present economic profit calculations for Home Depot
using both methods. Since Home Depot has been earning returns greater
than its cost of capital, its historical economic profit is positive. Given the
company’s strong competitive position, we also project positive economic
profits going forward. Not every company has positive economic profit. In
fact, many companies earn an accounting profit (net income greater than
zero) but do not earn their cost of capital.
To demonstrate how economic profit can be used to value a company—
and to demonstrate its equivalence to enterprise DCF, consider a stream of
growing cash flows valued using the growing-perpetuity formula:
Value0 =

FCF1
WACC − g

In Chapter 3, we transformed this cash flow perpetuity into the key
value driver model. The key value driver model is superior to the simple
cash flow perpetuity model, because it explicitly models the relation between growth and required investment. Using a few additional algebraic

ECONOMIC-PROFIT-BASED VALUATION MODELS

119

Exhibit 5.11 Home Depot: Economic Profit Summary
$ million
Historical
2001
15.0%
10.1%
4.9%

2002
16.8%
9.0%
7.9%

2003
19.4%
9.3%
10.1%

Forecast
2004
17.5%
9.3%
8.2%

2005
17.4%
9.3%
8.1%

2006
17.4%
9.3%
8.1%

Invested capital
Economic profit

21,379
1,048

23,635
1,857

26,185
2,645

29,655
2,424

32,910
2,677

36,432
2,950

Method 2
Invested capital
Weighted average cost of capital
Capital charge

21,379
10.1%
2,159

23,635
9.0%
2,124

26,185
9.3%
2,438

29,655
9.3%
2,761

32,910
9.3%
3,064

36,432
9.3%
3,392

NOPLAT
Capital charge
Economic profit

3,208
2,159
1,048

3,981
2,124
1,857

5,083
2,438
2,645

5,185
2,761
2,424

5,741
3,064
2,677

6,342
3,392
2,950

Method 1
Return on invested capital
Weighted average cost of capital
Economic spread

steps (see Appendix A) and the assumption that the company’s ROIC on
new projects equals historical ROIC, we can transform the cash flow perpetuity into a key value driver model based on economic profits:
Value0 = Invested Capital 0 +

Invested Capital 0 × ( ROIC − WACC )
WACC − g

Finally, we substitute the definition of economic profit:
Value0 = Invested Capital 0 +

Economic Profit 1
WACC − g

As can be seen in the economic-profit-based key value driver model, the
operating value of a company equals its book value of invested capital plus
the present value of all future value created. In this case, the future economic profits are valued using a growing perpetuity, because the company’s economic profits are increasing at a constant rate over time. More
generally, economic profit can be valued as follows:
∞

Invested Capital t−1 × ( ROICt − WACC )

t =1

(1 + WACC)t

Value0 = Invested Capital 0 + ∑

120

FRAMEWORKS FOR VALUATION

Since the economic profit valuation was derived directly from the free
cash flow model (see Appendix B for a proof of equivalence), any valuation
based on discounted economic profits will be identical to enterprise DCF.
To assure equivalence, however, you must:
• Use beginning-of-year invested capital (i.e., last year’s value).
• Use the same invested-capital number for both economic profit and
ROIC. For example, ROIC can be measured either with or without
goodwill. If you measure ROIC without goodwill, invested capital
must also be measured without goodwill. All told, it doesn’t matter
how you define invested capital, as long as you are consistent.
Exhibit 5.12 presents the valuation results for Home Depot using economic profit. Economic profits are explicitly forecasted for 10 years; the

Exhibit 5.12 Home Depot: Economic Profit Valuation
Invested
capital1
ROIC
Year
($ million)
(percent)
2004
29,655
17.5
2005
32,910
17.4
2006
36,432
17.4
2007
40,235
17.4
2008
44,329
17.3
2009
48,729
17.3
2010
53,445
17.3
2011
58,488
17.2
2012
63,870
17.2
2013
69,600
17.2
Continuing value
Present value of economic profit

1

WACC
(percent)
9.3
9.3
9.3
9.3
9.3
9.3
9.3
9.3
9.3
9.3

Economic
profit
($ million)
2,424
2,677
2,950
3,242
3,556
3,890
4,247
4,627
5,031
5,458
57,671

Discount
factor
(@ 9.3%)
0.915
0.837
0.766
0.700
0.641
0.586
0.536
0.491
0.449
0.411
0.411

Present
value of
economic
profit
($ million)
2,217
2,241
2,259
2,271
2,278
2,281
2,278
2,270
2,258
2,241
23,679
46,273

Invested capital¹2004
Invested capital plus present value of economic profit

29,655
75,928

Mid-year adjustment factor
Value of operations

1.046
79,384

Value of excess cash
Value of other nonoperating assets
Enterprise value

1,609
84
81,077

Value of debt
Value of capitalized operating leases
Equity value

(1,365)
(6,554)
73,158

Invested capital is measured at the beginning of the year.

ADJUSTED PRESENT VALUE MODEL

121

remaining years are valued using an economic profit continuing-value formula.7 Comparing the equity value from Exhibit 5.4 with that of Exhibit
5.12, we see that the value of Home Depot’s stock is the same, regardless of
the method.
The benefit of economic profit becomes apparent when we examine
the drivers of economic profit, ROIC and WACC, on a year-by-year basis in
Exhibit 5.12. Notice how the valuation depends heavily on Home Depot’s
ability to maintain current levels of ROIC (17.5 percent) well above the
WACC (9.3 percent). If the company’s markets become saturated, growth
could become elusive, and some companies might compete on price to steal
market share. If this occurs, ROICs will drop, and economic profits will revert to zero. Explicitly modeling ROIC as a primary driver of economic
profit will prominently display this analysis. Conversely, the free cash flow
model fails to show this dynamic. Free cash flow could continue to grow,
even as ROIC falls.
Another insight generated by the economic profit model occurs when
comparing a company’s value of operations with its invested capital. For
Home Depot, the estimated operating value ($79.4 billion) exceeds the company’s invested capital ($29.7 billion) by more than $49.7 billion.

ADJUSTED PRESENT VALUE MODEL
When building an enterprise DCF or economic profit valuation, most financial analysts discount all future flows at a constant weighted average cost of
capital. Using a constant WACC, however, assumes the company manages
its capital structure to a target debt-to-value ratio.
In most situations, debt grows in line with company value. But suppose
the company planned to significantly change its capital structure. Indeed,
companies with significant debt often pay it down as cash flow improves,
thus lowering their future debt-to-value ratios. In these cases, a valuation
7

To calculate continuing value, you can use the economic-profit-based key value driver formula,
but only if RONIC equals historical ROIC in the continuing-value year. If RONIC going forward
differs from the final year’s ROIC, then the equation must be separated into current and future
economic profits:
Continuing Valuet =

ICt ( ROICt +1 − WACC )
WACC

+

PV(Economic Profit t + 2 )
WACC − g

Current Economic Profits Future Economic Profits
such that

PV(Economic Profit t + 2 ) =

g 

NOPLATt +1 
( RONIC − WACC)
 RONIC 
WACC

122

FRAMEWORKS FOR VALUATION

based on a constant WACC would overstate the value of the tax shields. Although the WACC can be adjusted yearly to handle a changing capital
structure, the process is complex. Therefore, we turn to an alternative
model: adjusted present value.
The adjusted present value (APV) model separates the value of operations into two components: the value of operations as if the company were allequity financed and the value of tax shields that arise from debt financing:8
Adjusted
Enterprise Value as if the
Present Value of
=
+
Tax Shields
Present Value Company Was All-Equity Financed

The APV valuation model follows directly from the teachings of
Modigliani and Miller, who proposed that in a market with no taxes (among
other things), a company’s choice of financial structure will not affect the
value of its economic assets. Only market imperfections, such as taxes and
distress costs, affect enterprise value.
When building a valuation model, it is easy to forget these teachings.
To see this, imagine a company (in a world with no taxes) that has a 50-50
mix of debt and equity. If the company’s debt has an expected return of 5
percent and the company’s equity has an expected return of 15 percent,
its weighted average cost of capital would be 10 percent. Suppose the company decides to issue more debt, using the proceeds to repurchase shares.
Since the cost of debt is lower than the cost of equity, it would appear that
issuing debt to retire equity should lower the WACC, raising the company’s value.
This line of thinking is flawed, however. In a world without taxes, a
change in capital structure would not change the cash flow generated by
operations, nor the risk of those cash flows. Therefore, neither the company’s enterprise value nor its cost of capital would change. So why
did we think it would? When adding debt, we adjusted the weights, but we
failed to properly increase the cost of equity. Since debt payments have
priority over cash flows to equity, adding leverage increases the risk
to equity holders. When leverage rises, they demand a higher return.
Modigliani and Miller postulated this increase would perfectly offset the
change in weights.
In reality, taxes play a part in decision making, and capital structure
choice therefore can affect cash flows. Since interest is tax deductible, profitable companies can lower taxes by raising debt. But, if the company relies
8

In this book, we focus on the tax shields generated by interest. On a more general basis, the
APV values any incremental cash f lows associated with capital structure, such as tax shields,
issue costs, and distress costs. Distress costs include direct costs, such as court-related fees, and
indirect costs, such as the loss of customers and suppliers.

ADJUSTED PRESENT VALUE MODEL

123

too heavily on debt, the company’s customers and suppliers may fear bankruptcy and walk away, restricting future cash flow (academics call this
distress costs or deadweight costs). Rather than model the effect of capital
structure changes in the weighted average cost of capital, APV explicitly
measures and values the cash flow effects of financing separately.
To build an APV-based valuation, value the company as if it were allequity financed. Do this by discounting free cash flow by the unlevered cost
of equity (what the cost of equity would be if the company had no debt). To
this value, add any value created by the company’s use of debt. Exhibit 5.13
values Home Depot using adjusted present value. Since we assume that
Home Depot will manage its capital structure to a target debt-to-value level
of 9.3 percent, the APV-based valuation leads to the same value for equity as

Exhibit 5.13 Home Depot: Valuation Using Adjusted Present Value

Year
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Continuing value
Present value

Free cash
flow
($ million)
1,930
2,219
2,539
2,893
3,283
3,711
4,180
4,691
5,246
5,849
129,734

Interest
tax shield
(ITS)
113
120
128
136
145
153
162
171
180
189
3,626

Discount
factor
(@ 9.5%)
0.914
0.835
0.763
0.697
0.636
0.581
0.531
0.485
0.443
0.405
0.405

Present
value of FCF
($ million)
1,763
1,852
1,936
2,016
2,090
2,158
2,220
2,276
2,326
2,369
52,550
73,557

Present
value of ITS
($ million)
103
100
98
95
92
89
86
83
80
77
1,469
2,372

Present value of FCF using unlevered cost of equity
Present value of interest tax shields (ITS)
Present value of FCF and ITS

73,557
2,372
75,928

Mid-year adjustment factor
Value of operations

1.046
79,384

Value of excess cash
Value of other nonoperating assets
Enterprise value

1,609
84
81,077

Value of debt
Value of capitalized operating leases
Equity value

(1,365)
(6,554)
73,158

124

FRAMEWORKS FOR VALUATION

did enterprise DCF (see Exhibit 5.4) and economic profit (see Exhibit 5.12). A
simplified proof of equivalence between enterprise DCF and adjusted present value can be found in Appendix C. The following subsections explain
APV in detail.

Value Free Cash Flow at Unlevered Cost of Equity
When valuing a company using the APV, we explicitly separate the unlevered value of operations (Vu) from any value created by financing, such as
tax shields (Vtxa). For a company with debt (D) and equity (E), this relation is
as follows:
Vu + Vtxa = D + E

(1)

A second result of Modigliani and Miller’s work is that the total risk of
the company’s assets, real and financial, must equal the total risk of the financial claims against those assets. Thus, in equilibrium, the blended cost
of capital for operating assets (ku , which we call the unlevered cost of equity) and financial assets (ktxa) must equal the blended cost of capital for
debt (kd) and equity (ke ):
Vu
Vu + Vtxa

ku +

Vtxa
Vu + Vtxa

Operating
Assets

ktxa =

Tax Assets

D
E
ke
kd +
D+E
D+E
Debt

(2)

Equity

In the corporate finance literature, academics combine Modigliani and
Miller’s two equations to solve for the cost of equity—to demonstrate the relation between leverage and the cost of equity. In Appendix D, we algebraically rearrange equation 2 to solve for the levered cost of equity:
ke = ku +

Vtxa
D
ku − kd ) −
(
( ku − ktxa )
E
E

As this equation indicates, the cost of equity depends on the unlevered
cost of equity plus a premium for leverage, less a reduction for the tax deductibility of debt.

Determining the unlevered cost of equity with market data To use the
APV, we need to discount projected free cash flow at the unlevered cost of
equity, ku. However, none of the variables (including ku) on the left side of

ADJUSTED PRESENT VALUE MODEL

125

equation 2 can be observed. Only the values on the right—that is, those related to debt and equity—can be estimated directly. Because there are so
many unknowns and only one equation, we must impose additional restrictions to solve for ku.

Method 1: Assume ktxa equals ku If you believe the risk associated with tax
shields (ktxa) equals the risk associated with operating assets (ku), equation 2
can be simplified dramatically (see Appendix D):

ku =

D
E
ke
kd +
D+E
D+E

(3)

We can now determine the unlevered cost of equity because it now relies
solely on observable variables, that is, those related to debt and equity. In
fact, ku looks very similar to the weighted average cost of capital, without the
interest tax shield.
Equation 3 can be rearranged to solve for the levered cost of equity:

ke = ku +

D
( ku − kd )
E

(4)

Note that when the company has no debt (D = 0), ke equals ku. This is
why ku is referred to as the unlevered cost of equity.

Method 2: Assume ktxa equals kd If you believe the risk associated with
tax shields (ktxa) is comparable to the risk of debt (kd), equation 2 can be rearranged to solve for the unlevered cost of equity:

ku =

D − Vtxa
D − Vtxa + E

kd +

E
ke
D − Vtxa + E

(5)

In this equation, ku relies on observable variables, such as the market value
of debt, market value of equity, cost of debt, and cost of equity, as well as one
unobservable variable: the present value of tax shields (Vtxa). To use equation 4, discount expected future tax shields at the cost of debt (to remain
consistent) and then solve for the unlevered cost of equity.
Many practitioners further refine the last equation by imposing an additional restriction: that the absolute dollar level of debt is constant. If the dollar level of debt is constant, the annual expected tax shield equals (D × kd) ×

126

FRAMEWORKS FOR VALUATION

Tm, where Tm equals the marginal tax rate. Applying a no-growth perpetuity formula allows us to value the tax shield:
Vtxa =

(D × kd ) × Tm
kd

= D × Tm

Substituting D × Tm for the value of the tax shield in the last equation leads to:
ku =

(1 − Tm ) D
E
kd +
k
1
−
+
1
−
T
D
E
T
( m)
( m)D + E e

(6)

Although equation 6 is quite common in practice, its use is limited because
the assumptions are extremely restrictive.

Choosing the appropriate formula Which formula should you use to
back-solve for the unlevered cost of equity, ku? It depends on how you see
the company managing its capital structure going forward and whether the
debt is risk free. If you believe the company will manage its debt-to-value to
a target level (the company’s debt will grow with the business), then the
value of the tax shields will track the value of the operating assets. Thus,
the risk of tax shields will equal the risk of operating assets (ktxa equals ku).
The majority of companies have relatively stable capital structures (as a percentage of expected value), so we favor the first method.
If you believe the debt to equity ratio will not remain constant, then the
value of interest tax shields will be more closely tied to the value of forecasted debt, rather than operating assets. In this case, the risk of tax shields
is equivalent to the risk of debt (when a company is unprofitable, it cannot
use interest tax shields, the risk of default rises, and the value of debt
drops). In this case, equation 5 better approximates the unlevered cost of equity.9 This situation occurs frequently in periods of high debt such as financial distress and leveraged buyouts.
Value Tax Shields and Other Capital Structure Effects
To complete an APV-based valuation, forecast and discount capital structure side effects such as tax shields, security issue costs, and distress costs.
Since Home Depot has little chance of default, we estimated the company’s
future interest tax shields using the company’s promised yield to maturity
and marginal tax rate (see Exhibit 5.14). To calculate the expected interest
9

Even if a company’s tax shields are predetermined for a given period, eventually they will track
value. For instance, successful leveraged buyouts pay down debt for a period of time, but once the
debt level becomes reasonable, debt will more likely track value than remain constant.

CAPITAL CASH FLOW MODEL

127

Exhibit 5.14 Home Depot: Forecast of Interest Tax Shields

Year
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Continuing value

Prior year
net debt
($ million)
6,310
6,737
7,179
7,637
8,107
8,589
9,081
9,579
10,081
10,583
11,082

Expected
interest rate
(percent)
4.7
4.7
4.7
4.7
4.7
4.7
4.7
4.7
4.7
4.7
4.7

Interest
payment
($ million)
295
315
336
357
379
402
425
448
472
495
518

Marginal
tax rate
(percent)
38.2
38.2
38.2
38.2
38.2
38.2
38.2
38.2
38.2
38.2
38.2

Interest
tax shield
($ million)
113
120
128
136
145
153
162
171
180
189
198

payment in 2004, multiply the prior year’s net debt of $6.3 billion by the expected yield of 4.7 percent (net debt equals reported debt plus capitalized
operating leases minus excess cash). This led to an expected interest payment of $295 million. Next multiply the expected interest payment by the
marginal tax rate of 38.2 percent, for an expected interest tax shield of $113
million in 2004.
Home Depot’s conservative use of debt makes tax shield valuation
straightforward. For companies with significant leverage, the company may
not be able to fully use the tax shields (it may not have enough profits to
shield). If there is a significant probability of default, you must model expected tax shields, rather than the tax shields based on promised interest
payments. To do this, reduce each promised tax shield by the cumulative
probability of default.

CAPITAL CASH FLOW MODEL
When a company actively manages its capital structure to a target debt-tovalue level, both free cash flow (FCF) and the interest tax shield (ITS) are
discounted at the unlevered cost of equity, ku:
∞

∞
ITS t
+
∑
t
t
t =1 (1 + ku )
t =1 (1 + ku )

V=∑

FCFt

In 2000, Richard Ruback of the Harvard Business School argued there
is no need to separate free cash flow from tax shields when both flows are

128

FRAMEWORKS FOR VALUATION

discounted by the same cost of capital.10 He combined the two flows and
named the resulting cash flow (FCF plus interest tax shields) capital cash
flow (CCF):
∞

FCFt + ITS t

t =1

(1 + ku )t

V = PV(Capital Cash Flows) = ∑

Given that Ruback’s assumptions match those of the weighted average
cost of capital, the capital cash flow and WACC-based valuations will lead
to identical results. In fact, we now have detailed three distinct but identical
valuation methods created solely around how they treat tax shields: WACC
(tax shield valued in the cost of capital), APV (tax shield valued separately),
and CCF (tax shield valued in the cash flow).
Although FCF and CCF lead to the same result when debt is proportional to value, we believe free cash flow models are superior to capital cash
flow models. Why? By keeping NOPLAT and FCF independent of leverage,
we can cleanly evaluate the company’s operating performance over time
and across competitors. A clean measure of historical operating performance leads to better forecasts.

CASH-FLOW-TO-EQUITY VALUATION MODEL
In each of the preceding valuation models, we determined the value of equity indirectly by subtracting nonequity claims from enterprise value. The
equity cash flow model values equity directly by discounting cash flows
to equity at the cost of equity, rather than at the weighted average cost of
capital.11
Exhibit 5.15 details the cash flows to equity for Home Depot. Cash flow
to equity can be computed by reorganizing free cash flow found in Exhibit
5.6 or using the traditional method in Exhibit 5.15. In the traditional
method, cash flow to equity starts with net income. Next, noncash expenses
are added back, and investments in working capital, fixed assets, and nonoperating assets are subtracted. Finally, any increases in nonequity financing such as debt are added, and decreases in nonequity financing are
subtracted. Alternatively, we can compute cash flow to equity as dividends
10

Richard S. Ruback, “Capital Cash Flows: A Simple Approach to Valuing Risky Cash Flows,”
Social Science Research Network (March 2000).
11
The equity method can be difficult to implement correctly because capital structure is embedded in the cash f low. This makes forecasting difficult. For companies whose operations are
related to financing, such as financial institutions, the equity method is appropriate. We discuss valuing financial institutions in Chapter 25.

CASH-FLOW-TO-EQUITY VALUATION MODEL

129

Exhibit 5.15 Home Depot: Equity Cash Flow Summary
$ million
Historical
2001
3,044
756
8
(6)
3,802

2002
3,664
895
8
173
4,740

2003
4,304
1,075
1
605
5,985

Forecast
2004
4,796
1,193
0
214
6,203

2005
5,318
1,321
0
237
6,876

2006
5,882
1,459
0
262
7,603

Investment in operating working capital
Investment in net long-term assets
Decrease (increase) in excess cash
Investment in other nonoperating assets

834
(3,224)
(1,509)
9

(194)
(2,683)
383
(24)

72
(3,780)
(473)
23

(294)
(3,433)
(177)
(9)

(318)
(3,745)
(191)
(10)

(344)
(4,076)
(207)
(11)

Increase (decrease) in short-term debt
Increase (decrease) in long-term debt
Cash flow to equity

207
(295)
(176)

(211)
71
2,082

509
(465)
1,871

(44)
(73)
2,173

(54)
(91)
2,466

(66)
(112)
2,788

Dividends
Share repurchases (issued)
Cash flow to equity

2001
396
(572)
(176)

2002
492
1,590
2,082

2003
595
1,276
1,871

2004
663
1,510
2,173

2005
735
1,731
2,466

2006
813
1,975
2,788

Net income
Depreciation
Amortization
Increase (decrease) in deferred taxes
Gross cash flow

plus share repurchases minus new equity issues. Both methods generate
identical results.
To value Home Depot, we discount projected equity cash flows at the cost
of equity (see Exhibit 5.16 on p. 130). Unlike enterprise-based models, no
adjustments are made for nonoperating assets, debt, or capitalized operating
leases. Rather, they are included as part of the equity cash flow.
Once again, note how the valuation, derived using equity cash flows,
matches each of the prior valuations.12 This occurs because we have modeled
12

When performing a stand-alone equity cash f low valuation, you can calculate the continuing
value by using a simple growing perpetuity:

Ve =

g 

Net Income  1 −

ROE 
ke − g

To tie the free cash f low and equity cash f low models, you must convert free cash f low continuing-value inputs into equity cash f low inputs. We did this using:

g 

=
Net Income  1 −

ROE 

g 

NOPLAT  1 −

ROIC 
1+

ke − (1 − T ) kd 
D
1−

E 
ke − g

130

FRAMEWORKS FOR VALUATION

Exhibit 5.16 Home Depot: Cash-Flow-to-Equity Valuation

Year
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Continuing value
Present value of cash flow
to equity
Midyear adjustment amount
Equity value

Cash flow
to equity
($ million)
2,173
2,466
2,788
3,143
3,530
3,954
4,416
4,917
5,459
6,044
122,492

Discount
factor
(@ 9.9%)
0.910
0.828
0.754
0.686
0.624
0.568
0.517
0.470
0.428
0.389
0.389

Present
value of CFE
($ million)
1,978
2,042
2,101
2,155
2,203
2,245
2,282
2,312
2,336
2,353
47,695
69,702
3,456
73,158

Home Depot’s debt-to-value ratio at a constant level. If debt-to-value instead
changes over time, the equity model becomes difficult to implement and can
lead to conceptual errors. For example, if leverage is expected to rise, the cost
of equity must be adjusted to reflect the additional risk imposed on equity
holders. Although formulas exist to adjust the cost of equity, many of the
best-known formulas are built under restrictions that may be inconsistent
with the way you are implicitly forecasting the company’s capital structure
via the cash flows. This will cause a mismatch between cash flows and the
cost of equity, resulting in an incorrect valuation.
Unwittingly changing the company’s capital structure when using the
cash-flow-to-equity model occurs too easily—and that is what makes the
model so risky. Suppose you plan to value a company whose debt-to-value
ratio is 15 percent. You believe the company will pay extra dividends, so you
increase debt to raise the dividend payout ratio. Presto! Increased dividends lead to higher equity cash flows and a higher valuation. Even though
operating performance has not changed, the equity value has mistakenly
increased. What happened? Using new debt to pay dividends causes a rise
in net debt to value. Unless you adjust the cost of equity, the valuation will
rise incorrectly.
Another shortcoming of the direct equity approach occurs when valuing a company by business unit. The direct equity approach requires allocating debt and interest expense to each unit. This creates extra work yet
provides few additional insights.

OTHER APPROACHES TO DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW

131

OTHER APPROACHES TO DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW
You may also come across two variants of enterprise DCF:
1. Using real instead of nominal cash flows and discount rates
2. Discounting pretax cash flows instead of after-tax cash flows
These approaches are well suited only to limited circumstances.

Using Real Cash Flows and Discount Rates
Companies can be valued by projecting cash flow in real terms (e.g., in constant 2004 dollars) and discounting this cash flow at a real discount rate
(e.g., the nominal rate less expected inflation). But most managers think in
terms of nominal rather than real measures, so nominal measures are often
easier to communicate. In addition, interest rates are generally quoted nominally rather than in real terms (excluding expected inflation). Also, since
historical financial statements are stated in nominal terms, projecting future statements in real terms is difficult and confusing.
A second difficulty occurs when calculating and interpreting ROIC.
The historical statements are nominal, so historical returns on invested
capital are nominal. But if the projections for the company use real rather
than nominal forecasts, returns on new capital are also real. Projected returns on total capital (new and old) are a combination of nominal and real,
so they are impossible to interpret. The only way around this is to restate
historical performance on a real basis. This is a complex and timeconsuming task. The extra insights gained rarely equal the effort (except in
extremely high-inflation environments described in Chapter 22).

Discounting Pretax Cash Flow
For purposes of valuing internal investment opportunities, individual project cash flows are sometimes calculated without taxes. The pretax cash flow
is then discounted by a pretax “hurdle rate” (the market-based cost of capital multiplied by 1 plus the marginal tax rate) to determine a pretax value.
This method, however, leads to three fundamental inconsistencies. First,
the government calculates taxes on profits after depreciation, not on cash flow
after capital expenditures. By discounting pretax cash flow at the pretax cost
of capital, you implicitly assume capital investments are tax deductible when
made, not as they are depreciated. Furthermore, short-term investments, such
as accounts receivable and inventory, are never tax deductible. Selling a product at a profit is what leads to incremental taxes, not holding inventory. By discounting pretax cash flow at the pretax cost of capital, you incorrectly assume

132

FRAMEWORKS FOR VALUATION

investments in operating working capital are tax deductible. Finally, it can be
shown that even when net investment equals depreciation, the final result will
be downward biased—and the larger the cost of capital, the larger the bias.
This bias occurs because the method is only an approximation, not a formal
mathematical relation. Because of these inconsistencies, we recommend
against discounting pretax cash flows at a pretax hurdle rate.

ALTERNATIVES TO DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW
To this point, we have focused solely on discounted cash flow models.
Two additional valuation techniques exist: multiples (comparables) and
real options.

Multiples
Assume that you have been asked to value a company that is about to go
public. Although you project and discount free cash flow to derive an enterprise value, you worry that your forecasts lack precision. One way
to place your DCF model in the proper context is to create a set of comparables. One of the most commonly used comparables is the enterprisevalue-to-earnings before interest, taxes, and amortization (EV/EBITA)
multiple. To apply the EV/EBITA multiple, look for a set of comparable
companies, and multiply a representative EV/EBITA multiple by the company’s EBITA. For example, assume the company’s EBITA equals $100 million and the typical EV/EBITA multiple in the industry is 15×. Multiplying
15 by $100 million leads to an estimated value of $1.5 billion. Is the enterprise DCF valuation near $1.5 billion? If not, what enables the company to
earn better (or worse) returns or grow faster (or slower) than other companies in the industry?
Although the concept of multiples is simple, the methodology is misunderstood and often misapplied. Companies within an industry will
have different multiples for valid economic reasons. Computing a representative multiple ignores this fact. In addition, common multiples, such
as the price-to-earnings ratio, suffer from the same capital structure problems as equity cash flows. In Chapter 12, we demonstrate how to build and
interpret forward-looking comparables, independent of capital structure
and other nonoperating items.

Real Options
In 1997 Robert Merton and Myron Scholes won the Nobel Prize in Economics for developing an ingenious method to value derivatives that avoids the
need to estimate either cash flows or the cost of capital. (Fischer Black

REVIEW QUESTIONS

133

would have been named as a third recipient, but the Nobel Prize is not
awarded posthumously.) Their model relies on what today’s economists call
a “replicating portfolio.” They argued that if there exists a portfolio of
traded securities whose future cash flows perfectly mimic the security you
are attempting to value, the portfolio and security must have the same
price. As long as we can find a suitable replicating portfolio, we need not
discount future cash flows.
Given the model’s power, there have been many recent attempts to
translate the concepts of replicating portfolios to corporate valuation. This
valuation technique is commonly known as real options. Unlike those for financial options, however, replicating portfolios for companies and their
projects may be difficult to create. Therefore, although options-pricing
models may teach powerful lessons, today’s applications are limited. We
cover valuation using options-based models in Chapter 20.

SUMMARY
This chapter described the most common DCF valuation models, with particular focus on the enterprise DCF model and the economic profit model.
We explained the rationale for each model and reasons why each model has
an important place in corporate valuation. The remaining chapters in Part
Two describe a step-by-step approach to valuing a company:
• Chapter 6:

Thinking about Return on Invested Capital and Growth

• Chapter 7:

Analyzing Historical Performance

• Chapter 8:

Forecasting Performance

• Chapter 9:

Estimating Continuing Value

• Chapter 10: Estimating the Cost of Capital
• Chapter 11: Calculating and Interpreting Results
• Chapter 12: Using Multiples for Valuation
These chapters explain the technical details of valuation, including how to
calculate free cash flow from the accounting statements and how to create
and interpret the valuation through careful financial analysis.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What process should a manager employ to compute corporate valuation? In your answer, differentiate between the choice of a process
to be followed and the choice of valuation model.

134

FRAMEWORKS FOR VALUATION

2. Describe the enterprise DCF valuation model.
3. How does growth and return on invested capital drive free cash
flow? Illustrate with an example employing constant and nonconstant growth rates.
4. In terms of the enterprise DCF model, how would a manager increase corporate value?
5. Describe the economic profit model. Identify the differences between the economic profit model’s value drivers compared to the
enterprise DCF model value drivers.
6. Under what conditions would the discounted dividend model of equity value incorrectly define corporate value?
7. Under what circumstances would an executive select the adjusted
present value (APV) model of corporate valuation over either the
enterprise DCF model or the economic profit model?
8. Why is it important to compute the company’s unlevered cost of equity when the APV model is used to determine corporate value?
9. When would a manager use real versus nominal cash flows and
rates to value entities?
10. You have been asked to value a stable company (i.e., no growth)
whose revenues are $100 million and operating margins are 10 percent. Since the company is not growing, working capital is constant
and capital expenditures are spent only to replace depreciation. The
company has $50 million in debt outstanding and has a cost of debt
equal to 5 percent (the company’s bonds trade at par, so interest payments can be computed using the cost of debt). The company has 10
million shares outstanding and its stock is trading at $10.50. The
company has a cost of equity equal to 10 percent. The company faces
a tax rate of 40 percent.
a. Compute free cash flow.
b. Assuming the current capital structure proxies the target capital
structure, estimate the weighted average cost of capital.
c. Using a no-growth perpetuity (FCF divided by WACC), estimate
the company’s enterprise value, the company’s equity value, and
its stock price. Is the company undervalued?
d. If interest taxes shields are discounted at the unlevered cost of
equity, what is the unlevered cost of equity?
e. Compute enterprise value using adjusted present value. How
does your result differ from part c?

6
Thinking about Return
on Invested Capital
and Growth
A fully developed discounted cash flow model can be complex. Models that
forecast each line item on the income statement and balance sheet can include hundreds of numbers, if not thousands. But in the forest of numbers,
it is all too easy to forget the fundamentals: A company’s value depends on
its return on invested capital (ROIC) and its ability to grow. All other considerations—gross margins, cash tax rates, collection periods, and inventory turns—are, well, just details.
By focusing on ROIC and growth, you can place your forecasts in the
proper context. You can measure how well the model’s projections fit with
the capabilities of the company and the competitive dynamics of the industry. Consider the following example. You are valuing a company in the commodity chemicals business. The company projects operating costs to drop
by 3 percent per year over the next 10 years, but because the industry is
highly competitive, cost reductions are usually passed on to the consumer.
Therefore, you project that the price will fall 2 percent annually. Combined
with expected growth in volume, your forecasts lead to a healthy growth in
cash flow and a high valuation. After further analysis, however, you realize
that because costs are dropping faster than price, ROIC grows from 8 percent to 20 percent over the forecast period. What initially appears to be a
reasonable forecast translates to returns on capital not likely to be seen in a
commodity business.
Now consider a second model, one that focuses on the economics of the
business and not the details. To demonstrate the power of a simple yet insightful model, we present Exhibit 6.1 on page 136, which shows a set of realistic projections for a hypothetical company. We forecast only three line
135

136

THINKING ABOUT RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL AND GROWTH

Exhibit 6.1 The Fundamental Drivers of Value
Forecast
Revenue growth (percent)
After-tax operating margin (percent)
Capital turns
ROIC (percent)

Year
1
2
15.0 14.0
3.0
6.0
1.0
1.0
3.0
6.0

3
13.0
8.2
1.1
9.0

4
12.0
20.0
1.1
22.0

5
11.0
16.4
1.1
18.0

6
10.0
11.7
1.2
14.0

7
9.0
8.3
1.2
10.0

items: revenue growth, after-tax operating margins, and capital turns (the
ratio of sales to invested capital). We assume the company’s cost of capital
equals 10 percent and current revenues equal $1 billion. No other projections are made.
Using the enterprise DCF method outlined in Chapter 5, we value the
hypothetical company based solely on the forecasts presented in Exhibit 6.1.
The results are presented in Exhibit 6.2. To determine future revenues, we
grow current revenues by the forecasted growth rates. After-tax operating
profit equals revenue multiplied by after-tax operating margin. To calculate
invested capital, we divide each year’s revenue by projected capital turnover. Free cash flow equals after-tax operating profit less the increase in invested capital. Adding forecasted discounted free cash flow to continuing
value leads to enterprise value.1 We have been able to build a relatively sophisticated free cash flow model based on only three projections.
If simple models provide the necessary flexibility to value a company,
why do so many complicated models exist? In some cases, the details are
unnecessary. In fact, extraneous details can cloud the drivers that really
matter. You should make detailed line item forecasts only when they increase the accuracy of key value driver forecasts. For example, perhaps the
ROIC you forecast requires dropping the inventory holding period from 50
days to 35 days, an operational improvement beyond the capabilities of the
company.
We start the chapter by examining economic theory and how competitive dynamics should affect long-term corporate performance. In the second part of the chapter, we analyze ROIC and growth from an empirical
perspective, presenting 40 years of data on the size, timing, and sustainability of ROIC and growth. We find that the typical company’s returns on
capital gradually regress toward a median ROIC of 9 percent, but many
companies show persistence even over 15-year periods. Fast revenue growth,
1

We assume economic profits are zero (i.e., ROIC equals the cost of capital) beyond year 7.
When economic profits equal zero, the enterprise value of a company equals its book value.
Therefore, the continuing value in year 7 equals the book value of invested capital. To determine
today’s value, invested capital in year 7 is discounted by seven years.

A FRAMEWORK FOR VALUE CREATION

137

Exhibit 6.2 A Valuation Based on Fundamentals
$ million

Year
1
1,150.0
34.5
1,150.0

2
1,311.0
78.7
1,311.0

3
1,481.4
121.2
1,346.8

4
1,659.2
331.8
1,508.4

5
1,841.7
301.4
1,674.3

6
2,025.9
236.4
1,688.2

7
2,208.2
184.0
1,840.2

Free cash flow
Operating profits¹
Net investment
Free cash flow

34.5
(200.0)
(165.5)

78.7
(161.0)
(82.3)

121.2
(35.8)
85.5

331.8
(161.6)
170.2

301.4
(165.9)
135.5

236.4
(14.0)
222.4

184.0
(151.9)
32.1

Discount factor
Discounted cash flow

0.91
(150.5)

0.83
(68.0)

0.75
64.2

0.68
116.3

0.62
84.1

0.56
125.5

0.51
16.5

Revenues
Operating profits¹
Invested capital

Valuation
PV(explicit forecasts)
Continuing value
Enterprise value

0
1,000.0
25.0
950.0

188.1
944.3
1,132.4

¹After-tax.

on the other hand, is fleeting. Even the fastest growers struggle to maintain
high growth rates, regressing to the long-run median of 6 percent real
growth within five years.

A FRAMEWORK FOR VALUE CREATION
In Chapter 3, we introduced a simple, yet powerful, valuation formula that
we call the key value driver formula. Derived directly from the growing
cash flow perpetuity, the key value driver formula formalized the direct relation between ROIC, growth, and a company’s valuation. For some companies, especially companies in mature industries, the key value driver
formula works quite well.
For companies growing quickly, however, the key value driver formula
is overly restrictive in its assumptions. In many cases, ROIC will change
over time as companies and their product markets evolve. Exhibit 6.3 on
page 138 presents a general pattern for ROIC over time for a single-product
company (later in this chapter, we demonstrate how this pattern can take
different shapes). The ability to create value for this hypothetical company
can be measured in two dimensions: the level of peak ROIC and the sustainability of returns in excess of the cost of capital. In this example, the
peak ROIC occurs where the vertical arrow marks the spread between
ROIC and cost of capital. The horizontal arrow represents sustainability;
the longer a company creates value (ROIC greater than WACC), the greater

138

THINKING ABOUT RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL AND GROWTH

Exhibit 6.3 A General Model of Value Creation
Projected ROIC
30
Competitive
pressure
Peak
ROIC

20

Percent

Sustainability
WACC

10

0
5

10

15

20

Years
–10

its enterprise value. When it can no longer protect its competitive position,
as marked by the downward arrows of competitive pressure, economic theory predicts its ROIC will regress to WACC such that enterprise value
equals the book value of invested capital. (Empirical evidence, however,
demonstrates this may not be the case; more on this later.)
To better understand the components of value creation, we first examine peak ROIC. Consider the following representation of return on invested capital:
ROIC = (1 − T )

(Unit Price − Unit Cost) × Quantity
Invested Capital

This version of ROIC is identical to the traditional definition of ROIC:
NOPLAT divided by invested capital. We segment the ratio, however, into
taxes (T), revenue and cost per unit, as well as quantity, to highlight the potential sources of value creation that you should consider when valuing a
company.2 The formula generates a series of questions. Can the company
charge a price premium for its products or services? Does the company
have lower unit costs than its competition? Can the company sell more
products per dollar of invested capital? To justify high future ROICs, you
must identify at least one source of competitive advantage.
2
We introduce units to motivate a discussion surrounding price, cost, and volume. The formula,
however, is not specific to manufacturing. Units can represent the number of hours billed, patients seen, transactions processed, and so on.

A FRAMEWORK FOR VALUE CREATION

139

Price premium In commodity markets, companies are price takers. Price
takers must sell at the market price to generate business. Alternatively, a
price setter has control over the price it charges. To enable price setting, a
company cannot sell a commoditized product. It must find a way to differentiate its product so that its competition, if any, is limited.
The beverage company Coca-Cola is a price setter. For the company’s
primary products, Coke and Diet Coke, Coca-Cola can charge a price well in
excess of its marginal costs because most consumers choose soft drinks
based on taste, preference, and brand image, not on price. Coca-Cola customers are extremely loyal and rarely switch brands, even when faced with
a generic, low-priced alternative. Coke’s power to charge a price premium
can be seen in the company’s ROIC and valuation. At year-end 2003, Coke’s
ROIC was 48 percent, excluding goodwill, and its enterprise value equaled
$125 billion, more than 11 times its book value of invested capital.
Be careful, however. Consumer brand loyalty does not guarantee immunity to competition. Consumer preferences change over time (consider the
recent low-carb diet craze in the United States), and as products change,
customers may migrate to competing offerings.
Cost competitiveness A second driver of high ROIC is a company’s ability
to sell products and services at a lower cost than the competition. The discount retailer Wal-Mart is a low-cost operator. Wal-Mart is well known for
using its substantial purchasing volume to lower its costs and force better
terms from its suppliers. The company also invests heavily in computing
power and other technologies to continually improve its cost position. It
stands at the forefront of RFID, a new technology that electronically identifies when inventory enters a stockroom, reaches the main floor, and leaves
the store.3 Data collected is sent to Wal-Mart’s Internet-based software, Retail Link, which allows the retailer’s 30,000 suppliers to check inventory
and sales in near real time. To lower costs further, the company is developing software that will trigger a business process, such as automated restocking or purchasing.
Capital efficiency Even if profits per unit (or transaction) are small, a
company can generate significant value by selling more products per dollar
of invested capital than its competition. In the airline industry, an aircraft
generates revenue when it is transporting passengers, not when it sits on
the ground empty. Thus, the more an airline flies each aircraft in a given
day, the more value it can create.
Southwest Airlines is an example of a company with superb capital efficiency. The typical Southwest aircraft can land, deplane, board, and take off
3

L. Sullivan, “ Wal-Mart ’s Way: Heavyweight Retailer Looks Inward to Stay Innovative in Business Technology,” Information Week (September 27, 2004): 36.

140

THINKING ABOUT RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL AND GROWTH

in well under an hour. Conversely, this turnaround process at network carriers, such as American and United, averages over two hours per flight.
This difference enables Southwest to spend more time in the air and less
time on the ground.
The differences in ground time can be traced directly to differences in
corporate strategy. First, Southwest flies point-to-point and does not rely on
a hub; network carriers use hubs. A network carrier lands every flight at the
same time, transfers passengers, and takes off at the same time. Not only
does the congestion cause delays, but any late arrivals cause further delays
throughout the system. A point-to-point airline does not face these constraints. Second, Southwest uses a single plane type, whereas network carriers use many. If a pilot calls in sick, an airline that has only one plane type
can use any available pilot in the system. A network carrier might have an
available pilot, but unless the pilot is certified to fly the given aircraft, the
aircraft will sit empty until a qualified pilot becomes available.

Sustainability
To generate a high value, a company must not only excel at pricing power,
cost competitiveness, or capital efficiency, but also must be able to sustain
this competitive advantage over long periods. If the company cannot prevent competition from duplicating its efforts, high ROIC will be short-lived,
and the company’s value will be low. Consider a major cost improvement
recently implemented by the airlines. The self-service kiosk allows passengers to purchase a ticket or print a boarding pass without waiting in line.
From the airlines’ perspective, fewer ground personnel can handle more
people. So why has this cost improvement not translated into high ROICs
for the airlines? Since every company has access to the technology, any cost
improvements are passed directly to the consumer in the form of lower
prices.
A company can maintain pricing power or a cost advantage only if the
company maintains a barrier to imitation (from existing competition) or a
barrier to entry (from new competition). The complexity of Microsoft’s primary product, Windows, makes switching to an alternative unattractive for
individuals and companies. Once users have become well versed in the platform, they are unlikely to switch to a new competitor. Even Linux, a lowcost alternative to Windows, has struggled to gain market share as system
administrators and end users remain wary of learning a new way of computing. Or consider Wal-Mart, which located its first stores in rural communities. Rather than build a small store on the town’s main street, as did
Woolworth, Wal-Mart builds large-scale stores on the outskirts of town.
Wal-Mart uses its size to dictate low prices and good terms from its suppliers; but more importantly, by building such a large store in an isolated
community, it prevents other large, low-cost competitors from entering the

A FRAMEWORK FOR VALUE CREATION

141

market. A competitor such as Target or Costco could enter the community
but, given the scale required to match Wal-Mart’s prices, would generate instant overcapacity in the region.

Examples of Peak ROIC and Sustainability
The general pattern of ROIC and sustainability provided in Exhibit 6.3 is
flexible and can describe different companies. Some companies have peak
ROICs that are very high but offer little sustainability. Other companies
have peak ROICs near the cost of capital but can generate excess returns
over an extremely long period. Two examples with varying levels of peak
ROIC and sustainability are Intel and Johnson & Johnson.
Intel has twice sustained high ROICs over the last 30 years. Exhibit 6.4
plots ROIC for Intel between 1973 and 2003. During that time, Intel has had
two distinct periods of significant value creation. In its early life, the company was a pioneer in the computer chips that store data, commonly known
as random access memory (RAM) chips. Intel created value for nearly 10
years, but the Japanese government made RAM a high priority, and companies such as NEC and Fujitsu began to flood the market with similar chips
at lower prices. The price competition was so intense that it nearly drove
Intel out of business. With a financial infusion from IBM, the company reinvented itself, creating the new “brains” of the personal computer. Through

Exhibit 6.4 ROIC at Intel Corporation, 1973–2003
ROIC measured as three-year rolling average
50

40

Increased competition from Japanese
for Random Access Memory
(RAM) chips.

Percent

30
Intel leads
the market for the personal
computer’s central processor.

20

Average WACC
10

0
1973

1978

1983

1988

1993

1998

2003

142

THINKING ABOUT RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL AND GROWTH

an informal partnership with Microsoft, Intel led the personal-computer microprocessor market. By the late 1990s, however, competitors such as Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) began making inroads, forcing Intel to
broaden its product line to include lower-priced chips. Facing increased
competition and a general downturn in technology, Intel could no longer
post the enormous ROICs of the mid-1990s. Today, Intel is still profitable
and remains a strong player in microprocessors for personal computers, but
the challenge for Intel is to capture the next major technology shift.
Economic theory dictates that companies earning returns in excess of
their cost of capital will invite competition. Yet some companies are able to
protect their primary product lines while concurrently expanding into new
markets. One such example is Johnson & Johnson. Historically, Johnson &
Johnson has earned strong returns on capital through its patented pharmaceuticals and branded consumer products lines, such as Tylenol and Johnson’s Baby Shampoo. Through strong brands and capable distribution, the
company has been able to maintain a price premium, even in the face of new
entrants and alternative products. More recently, the company broadened
its product portfolio to health care include medical devices and diagnostics,
given the strength of the healthcare industry and expected growth as the
baby boomers age.
As shown in Exhibit 6.5, which plots Johnson & Johnson’s ROIC over
the past 30 years, the company has maintained an ROIC greater than the

Exhibit 6.5 ROIC at Johnson & Johnson, 1973–2003
ROIC measured as three-year rolling average
30

In 1982, J&J’s pain reliever
Tylenol was recalled following
package tampering.

25

Percent

20

15
Sustained value creation

10

In 1998, J&J spends
nearly 4 billion dollars
in acquisitions, temporarily
slowing ROIC improvement.

Average WACC
5

0
1973

1978

1983

1988

1993

1998

2003

A FRAMEWORK FOR VALUE CREATION

143

cost of capital during the entire period. In fact, given the strength
of health care in the 1990s, returns have actually risen from the 1980s.
Only the Tylenol tampering scare of the 1980s and the high cost of acquisitions in the late 1990s have dampened the company’s continually strong
performance.

Recouping Initial Investments or Early Losses
Not every company generates positive spreads. When companies are not
earning returns in excess of their cost of capital (or are even losing
money), you must assess two questions: (1) How long will it take before
the company starts creating value? and (2) How large will the initial investments (or losses) be? We represent these two dimensions as arrows in
Exhibit 6.6. The horizontal arrow represents the time to break-even (from
a value creation perspective), and the vertical arrow represents the depth
of value destruction.
One company that invested for years before creating value (or even earning a profit) is Amgen. Today, Amgen is a global biotechnology company
that develops, manufactures, and markets therapeutics based on cellular biology and medicinal chemistry. Founded in 1980 with approximately $20
million in venture capital, the company burned through cash for nearly 10
years. In 1983, company scientists cloned the human protein erythropoietin
(EPO), which eventually led to the drug Epogen, a treatment for anemia. Immediately following the drug’s FDA approval in 1989, the company’s ROIC
skyrocketed to nearly 60 percent (see Exhibit 6.7 on p. 144).

Exhibit 6.6 ROIC Projections: Value Destruction at Young Companies
30
Depth of value
destruction
Time to value
creation

20

Percent

Period of value
destruction
10
WACC

0
5

10
Years

–10

15

20

144

THINKING ABOUT RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL AND GROWTH

Exhibit 6.7 ROIC at Amgen, 1984 –2003
ROIC measured as three-year rolling average
80
60
Value creation

Percent

40
20

Average WACC

0
1984
–20

1988

1992

1996

2000

2003

Value
destruction

–40
–60

But standing in 1984, how could you predict the depth and length of
value destruction? Once EPO was cloned in 1983, it became crucial to thoroughly analyze how much additional research (in dollar terms) would be
needed to bring the product to market. In addition, how much would have
to be spent for marketing and distribution? Since the drug would not generate cash until it gained FDA approval, it is also necessary to estimate expected time until approval. When considering approval, the FDA will ask:
Is the drug truly revolutionary, or just incremental? How would the drug be
administered? What are the side effects? The answer to each of these questions has a direct impact on approval time.

AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL
In the previous section, we outlined the economic factors to consider when
valuing a company. Any forecasts you develop for ROIC should be consistent
with the company’s core competencies, its competitive advantage, and industry economics. As a second step, benchmark your forecasts against the actual
long-run historical performance of other companies. By comparing forecasts
with historical industry benchmarks, you can assess whether your forecasts of
future performance are reasonable in the context of other companies.
To help place forecasts of ROIC and growth in the proper context,
we present the historical financial performance (using ROIC and revenue

AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL

145

growth) for more than 5,000 U.S.-based nonfinancial companies over the
past 40 years. Our results are generated from McKinsey & Company’s corporate performance database, which relies on financial data provided by
Standard & Poor’s Compustat. Our key findings are as follows:
• The median ROIC between 1963 and 2003 was 9.0 percent and remained relatively constant throughout the period.4 ROIC does, however, vary dramatically across companies, with only half of observed
ROICs between 5 percent and 15 percent.
• Median ROIC differs by industry and growth, but not by company
size. Industries that rely on sustainable advantages, such as patents
and brands, tend to have high median ROICs (11 percent to 18 percent), whereas companies in basic industries, such as transportation
and utilities, tend to earn low ROICs (6 percent to 8 percent).
• Individual-company ROICs gradually regress toward medians over
time but are somewhat persistent. Fifty percent of companies that
earned ROICs greater than 20 percent in 1994 were still earning at
least 20 percent 10 years later.
To analyze historical corporate performance, we first measured median
ROIC for each of the past 40 years. In Exhibit 6.8 on page 146, median ROIC
is plotted between 1963 and 2003 for U.S.-based nonfinancial companies.
ROIC is presented with and without goodwill. The aggregate median ROIC
without goodwill equals 9.0 percent, and annual medians oscillate in a relatively tight range between 6.9 percent and 10.6 percent. This oscillation is
not random, but instead is tied directly to the overall growth of the economy. When regressing median ROIC versus gross domestic product (GDP),
we found that a 100-basis-point increase in GDP growth translates to a 20basis-point increase in median ROIC.
Although a given year’s median ROIC depends on the level of economic
growth, it demonstrates no long-term trend. At first, the lack of an upward
trend in ROIC may appear counterintuitive; especially given productivity
increases over the past 40 years. The U.S. Department of Labor reports manufacturing workers were approximately 3.5 times more productive in 2003
than they were in 1963. So why have productivity increases not translated
into improved financial performance? In most industries, healthy competition has transferred the benefits from internal improvements to customers
and employees in the form of lower prices and higher salaries, instead of
adding to corporate profits.

4

Throughout this section, we report aggregate median ROICs over the entire sample period. To
determine an aggregate median ROIC, we average each year’s median.

146

THINKING ABOUT RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL AND GROWTH

Exhibit 6.8 ROIC for Nonfinancial Companies
Annual ROIC without goodwill
25

Percent

20

Average
(percent)
15.3

3rd quartile

15
10

Max = 10.6 percent

Median

9.0

5 1st quartile

5.0

Min = 6.9 percent

0
1963

1968

1973

1978

1983

1988

1993

1998

Annual ROIC with goodwill
25

Percent

20

Average
(percent)

3rd quartile

Max = 10.4 percent

15
10

2003

13.6
Median
8.3

5 1st quartile
Min = 6.3 percent

4.7

0
1963

1968

1973

1978

1983

1988

1993

1998

2003

Source: Compustat, McKinsey & Company’s corporate performance database.

Although median ROICs show little change over the past 40 years, the
cross-sectional spread of company ROICs has increased. Over the entire period, half the companies typically had ROICs between 5.0 percent and 15.3
percent. Yet, since 1986, this spread has gradually widened, driven primarily by companies on the top end. In many cases, this improvement has occurred in industries with strong barriers to entry, such as patents or brands,
where the drops in raw-material prices and increased productivity have not
been transferred to other stakeholders.
The ROIC spreads across companies do not widen, however, when ROIC
is measured with goodwill. This implies that top companies are acquiring
other top performers yet paying full price for the acquired performance.
To further analyze the spread of ROIC across companies, we present a histogram in Exhibit 6.9. Each bar measures the percentage of observations
within a certain range. For instance, approximately 17 percent of the sample
has an ROIC between 5.0 percent and 7.5 percent. The aggregate distribution
is quite wide, with only half the sample between 5 percent and 15 percent. In
fact, in any given year, a particular company can have ROICs well below 0 or
above 40 percent. However, 84 percent of the sample had ROIC below 20 per-

AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL

147

Exhibit 6.9 ROIC Distribution for Nonfinancial Companies
Annual ROIC without goodwill, 1963–2003, percent

Percent of sample

Approximately 50 percent of the sample
within ROIC range of 5–15 percent
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
<–10.0 –5.0

0.0

2.5

5.0

7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0 22.5 25.0 30.0 35.0 40.0 >40.0
ROIC

Percent of
observations
below ROIC
level

5

7

11

15

25

42

56

66

74

80

84

87

89

92

94

95

100

84 percent of the sample
had ROIC below 20 percent.

Source: Compustat, McKinsey & Company’s corporate performance database.

cent. Thus, if you project sustained ROICs above 20 percent, you must believe
the company is truly exceptional, as only one in six companies achieved this
level of performance in a typical year.

Return on Invested Capital by Industry, Size, and Growth
Using aggregate data overlooks the fact that companies with certain characteristics are likely to have different levels of performance. Ideally, we would
provide a comprehensive list of segmentation, tying median ROICs directly
to the economic principles of pricing power, financial discipline, and competitive barriers to entry. This way, a valuation forecast could be benchmarked
against true comparables, rather than overall aggregates. These characteristics, however, are mostly unobservable and difficult to measure quantitatively. Therefore, we instead segmented our sample using proxies, such as
industry (different industries have varying competitive barriers to entry),
size (for economies of scale), and growth (for the intensity of competition).
In our first segmentation, we examined median ROIC by industry. In
Exhibit 6.10 on page 148, we rank 20 nonfinancial industries by median
ROIC ( based on performance over the past 40 years). To construct an industry, we used S&P’s Global Industry Classifications Standard. Each industry classification is broad and encompasses many companies. As the

148

THINKING ABOUT RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL AND GROWTH

Exhibit 6.10 ROIC by Industry Group1
percent
Annual ROIC without goodwill2
1963–2003
Pharmaceuticals and Biotechnology
Household and Personal Products
Software and Services
Media
Commercial Services and Supplies
Semiconductors and Semiconductor Equipment
Health Care Equipment and Services
Food, Beverage and Tobacco
Hotels, Restaurants and Leisure
Technology Hardware and Equipment
Automobiles and Components
Capital Goods
Food and Staples Retailing
Consumer Durables and Apparel
Retailing
Total Sample
Materials
Energy
Transportation
Telecommunication Services
Utilities

18.4
15.2
15.0
14.7
12.8
11.9
11.3
11.0
10.3
10.3
9.9
9.9
9.6
9.5
9.0
9.0
8.4
7.7
6.9
6.5
6.2

1994–2003
21.8
18.8
18.1
14.3
13.2
12.4
14.8
11.9
9.2
10.3
10.5
11.8
9.6
10.8
9.5
9.5
7.9
7.6
7.6
5.7
6.1

1
Based on S&P Global Industry Classification Standard, excluding financial companies.
2

Average of annual medians.
Source: Compustat, McKinsey & Company’s corporate performance database.

exhibit demonstrates, financial performance varies significantly across industries. Industries that have identifiable sustainable advantages, such as
patents and brands, tend to generate higher returns.5 Pharmaceutical and
biotechnology companies had a median ROIC of 18.4 percent; whereas
companies in commodity (and often regulated) industries, such as transportation and utilities, had much lower ROICs—6.9 percent and 6.2 percent, respectively. Although performance differs at the extremes, the
center is concentrated. Half the industries had median ROICs between 9
percent and 12 percent.
Although not reported, the industry ranking does not vary materially
over time. Comparing median ROICs for the 10-year period ending in 2003
versus the entire sample leads to few changes in order (only ROICs of health
care equipment companies are noticeably higher). Thus, industry membership can be an important predictor of performance.
We next segment the sample by size and growth. In Exhibit 6.11, we
present the median ROICs for 30 separate subgroupings (five categories by
5
Since R&D and advertising are not capitalized, ROIC will be upward-biased for industries
with significant intangible assets. Capitalizing intangible assets, however, requires subjective
assessments on amortization periods. Therefore, we present raw results without capitalizing
R&D and advertising.

AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL

149

Exhibit 6.11 ROIC Segmented by Size and Growth
Annual ROIC without goodwill, 1963 to 2003
Revenues
$200M–
$500M

$500M–
$1B

$1B–
$2.5B

>$2.5B

<0

3.3%

5.2%

6.0%

6.5%

7.0%

0–5

8.0%

7.7%

8.0%

8.1%

9.1%

5–10

8.9%

9.3%

9.6%

9.5%

10.3%

10–15

10.8%

10.9%

11.2%

10.9%

11.8%

15–20

11.9%

11.1%

11.7%

11.5%

11.9%

>20

12.4%

11.9%

11.8%

11.8%

11.6%

ROIC increases with higher growth rate

Three-year
real growth
rate
(percent)

<$200M

No clear relation between size and performance

Source: Compustat, McKinsey & Company’s corporate performance database.

total revenue and six categories by revenue growth), each of which has
roughly the same number of companies. Moving from the top of this chart
to the bottom, we find that median ROICs consistently increase as revenue
growth increases, regardless of company size. Do not, however, misinterpret these results. We do not believe growth causes strong performance. A
company that grows by stealing market share through price reductions is
unlikely to maintain high margins—and lower margins often lead to lower
ROICs. So why the positive correlation?
First, certain underlying factors enable both growth and ROIC. In rapidly
expanding sectors with barriers to entry (e.g., high fixed costs), current capacity cannot fulfill continually increasing market demand. Since buyers
exceed suppliers, prices and margins remain strong. If growth unexpectedly
slows, however, so that industry capacity cannot be filled, companies often
lower prices to generate the volume required to cover fixed costs. In this
case, as growth drops, so does ROIC.
Second, companies with high ROICs have more incentives and greater
opportunities to grow. A company earning a strong ROIC in its core business can create significant value by increasing growth (as demonstrated in

150

THINKING ABOUT RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL AND GROWTH

Chapter 3). Conversely, a company with returns at or below the cost of capital
is unlikely to create value by accepting new projects (unless economies of
scale lower unit costs). In addition, a company with a poor track record for
earning high returns on capital in its core business is unlikely to attract funding for new opportunities.
Unlike growth, a company’s size (as measured by revenues) shows no
clear relation with ROIC. Despite the common perception that economies of
should continually lower unit costs, many companies often reach minimum
efficient scale at relatively small sizes. At this point, any incremental
growth comes at the same unit cost, or even slightly higher costs, as bureaucratic inefficiency and other inflexibilities begin to dominate. To see this,
one merely needs to examine Southwest Airlines, a company with only 35
percent of the revenues of American Airlines yet eight times the equity valuation (as of year-end 2004). Or consider Nucor Steel, a company with only
80 percent of the revenues of United States Steel yet 1.5 times the valuation.

Return on Invested Capital Decay Rates
When a company generates ROICs greater than its cost of capital, it invites
competition. But how fast does the competition typically replicate a business, steal share, and force lower prices? In Exhibit 6.12, we address this
question by forming portfolios based on ROIC. For instance, in each year,

Exhibit 6.12 ROIC Decay Analysis: Nonfinancial Companies
Median ROIC of portfolio1
35

ROIC
(percent)

30
25

Percent

20
15

>20

10

15–20
10–15
5–10
<5

5
0
0

1

1

2

3

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11 12
Number of years following portfolio formation

At year 0, companies are grouped into one of five portfolios, based on ROIC.
Source: Compustat, McKinsey & Company’s corporate performance database.

13

14

15

AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL

151

we aggregated all companies earning an ROIC greater than 20 percent into
a single portfolio. We then tracked the median ROIC for each portfolio over
the next 15 years.
Exhibit 6.12 demonstrates a pattern of mean reversion. Companies earning high returns tend to fall gradually over the next 15 years, and companies earning low returns tend to rise over time. Only the portfolio
containing companies generating returns between 5 percent and 10 percent
(mostly regulated companies) remains constant.
An important result of Exhibit 6.12 is the continued persistence of superior performance beyond 10 years. Although the best companies cannot
maintain their current performance, their ROIC does not fully regress to the
aggregate median of 9 percent. Instead, the top portfolio’s median ROIC
drops from 29 percent to 15 percent. Since a company’s continuing value is
highly dependent on long-run forecasts of ROIC and growth, this result has
important implications for corporate valuation. Basing a continuing value
on the economic concept that ROIC will approach WACC is overly conservative for the typical company generating high ROICs (continuing value is the
focus of Chapter 9).
When benchmarking historical decay, it is important to segment results
by industry (especially if industry is a proxy for competitive barriers to
entry). In Exhibit 6.13, we plot the ROIC decay rates for the Consumer Staples

Exhibit 6.13 ROIC Decay Analysis: Consumer Staples
Median ROIC of portfolios1
35

ROIC
(percent)

30
25

Percent

20

>20

15

15–20
10–15

10

5–10
<5

5
0
0

1

1

2

3

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11 12
Number of years following portfolio formation

At year 0, companies are grouped into one of five portfolios, based on ROIC.
Source: Compustat, McKinsey & Company’s corporate performance database.

13

14

15

152

THINKING ABOUT RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL AND GROWTH

segment of the Food and Staples industry. As the exhibit demonstrates, ROICs
once again regress to the mean but at a much slower rate than seen in the full
sample. Top performers in Consumer Staples have a median ROIC of 26 percent, which drops to 20 percent after 15 years. (Top performers in the entire
sample dropped to 15 percent.) Even after 15 years, the original class of best
performers still outperforms the worst performers by more than 13 percent.
Although decay rates examine the rate of regression toward the mean,
decay rates present only aggregate results, not the spread of potential future
performance. Does every company generating returns greater than 20 percent eventually migrate to 15 percent, or do some companies actually generate higher returns? Conversely, do some top performers become poor
performers? To address this question, we present ROIC transition probabilities in Exhibit 6.14. An ROIC transition probability measures the probability
that a company will migrate from one ROIC grouping to another in 10 years.
For instance, a company generating an ROIC less than 5 percent in 1994 had
a 43 percent chance of earning less than 5 percent in 2003. Transition probabilities read from left to right, and the rows must sum to 100 percent.
As seen in Exhibit 6.14, both high and low performers demonstrate
significant persistence in performance. This pattern was consistent
throughout the 40-year period. Companies with an ROIC below 5 percent,
companies between 5 and 10 percent, and companies greater than 20 percent have a 43 percent, 40 percent, and 50 percent probability, respectively,
of remaining in the same grouping 10 years later. Only companies with
ROICs between 10 and 20 percent show little persistence. Companies that
earn between 10 and 15 percent can land in any grouping 10 years later
with roughly equal probability.
The results are clear: ROIC varies across companies and industries in a
systematic fashion. And for many companies, these differences are persistent—even in the face of ever more competitive markets.

Exhibit 6.14 ROIC Transition Probability, 1994–2003
Percent, three-year average of ROIC without goodwill
ROIC in 2003
<5

10–15

43

<5
ROIC in 1994

5–10
28

31

5–10
10–15

21

15–20

18

>20

19

40

15–20

12

6

17

7

25
19
5

25
20
13

Source: Compustat, McKinsey & Company’s corporate performance database.

>20

Total
11

100

6
11
17
13

100
100

18
25

100
50

100

AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF CORPORATE GROWTH

153

AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF CORPORATE GROWTH
Today’s public companies are under tremendous pressure to grow. Sell-side
analysts set aggressive growth targets for revenues, earnings per share, and
cash flow. Yet growth creates value only when a company’s new customers,
projects, or acquisitions generate returns greater than the risk-adjusted
cost of capital. Finding good projects becomes increasingly difficult as industries become ever more competitive and companies grow ever larger. To
generate revenue growth of 26.3 percent in 1990, Wal-Mart added 57,000
new employees. By 2003, the company was so large that it added approximately 100,000 employees, yet grew revenue by only 4.8 percent. To replicate 1990’s revenue growth at 2003 productivity levels, Wal-Mart would
have needed to add nearly half a million people in a single year—aggressive
by any standards.
To help place expectations of long-term growth in a realistic context, we
present data on the level and persistence of corporate growth over the past
40 years. Our analysis of revenue growth mirrors that of ROIC, except we
now use three-year rolling averages to moderate distortions caused by currency fluctuations and merger and acquisition (M&A) activity.6 Ideally, we
would report statistics on organic revenue growth, but current reporting
standards do not require companies to disclose the effects of currencies and
M&A on revenue growth. Algorithms can be applied to dampen distortions
but require overly stringent assumptions.7 We therefore report raw results.
In addition, all corporate growth results are analyzed using real, rather
than nominal, data. We do this because even mature companies saw a dramatic increase in revenue during the 1970s as inflation increased prices.
Therefore, to compare growth rates over different time periods, we strip out
the effect of inflation by using annual changes in the consumer price index.
If you plan to use these data to drive growth forecasts in a valuation model,
you must add expected inflation to the real results we present. (For more on
modeling inflation consistently, see Chapter 22.)
Our general results concerning revenue growth (measured in real terms,
except where noted) are as follows:
• The median revenue growth rate between 1963 and 2003 equals 6.3
percent in real terms and 10.2 percent in nominal terms. Real revenue
growth fluctuates more than ROIC, ranging from 1.8 percent in 1975
to 10.8 percent in 1998.
6
For more detail on how to define and separate organic, M&A, and currency-driven revenue
growth, see Chapter 7.
7
Acquired growth can be estimated by analyzing the increase in goodwill plus impairments, but
doing this has two drawbacks. First, acquired revenue must be estimated using a goodwill-torevenue ratio. However, profitable companies will have higher ratios, so applying an industry average ratio can cause systematic distortions. Second, goodwill exists only when companies use
purchase accounting. Companies that used pooling for M&A would still be incorrectly estimated.

154

THINKING ABOUT RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL AND GROWTH

• High growth rates decay very quickly. Companies growing faster
than 20 percent (in real terms) typically grow at only 8 percent
within 5 years and 5 percent within 10 years.
• Extremely large companies struggle to grow. Excluding the first year,
companies entering the Fortune 50 grow at an average of only 1 percent (above inflation) over the following 15 years.
We start by examining aggregate levels and trends of corporate growth.
Exhibit 6.15 presents median (real) revenue growth rates between 1963 and
2003. The annualized median revenue growth rate between 1963 and 2003
equals 6.3 percent and oscillates between 1.8 percent and 10.8 percent. Median revenue growth demonstrates no trend over time. Even so, real revenue growth of 6.3 percent is quite high, especially when compared with
real GDP growth in the United States at 3.3 percent. Why the difference?
Possible explanations abound. They include self-selection, specialization and outsourcing, global expansion, the use of medians, and nonorganic
growth. First, companies with good growth opportunities need capital to
grow. Since public markets are large and liquid, high-growth companies are
more likely to be publicly traded than privately held. We measure only publicly traded companies, so our growth results are likely to be higher. Second, as companies become increasingly specialized and outsource more
services, new companies, not picked up by GDP, will grow and develop
quickly. Consider Electronic Data Systems (EDS), a company that provides
information technology (IT) and data services. As companies move IT from

Exhibit 6.15 Revenue Growth for Nonfinancial Companies
Three-year rolling average of real revenue growth

CAGR
(percent)

30

20 3rd quartile

Percent

15.4
10

Max = 10.8 percent

Median

6.3
0

1st quartile
–0.2

Min = 1.8 percent

–10
1963

1968

1973

1978

1983

Source: Compustat, McKinsey & Company’s corporate performance database.

1988

1993

1998

2003

AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF CORPORATE GROWTH

155

internal management to EDS, GDP will not change, since it measures aggregate output. Yet EDS’s high growth will be part of our sample. A third
explanation is that many of the companies in our sample create products
and generate revenue outside the United States. This revenue will not be
picked up by GDP. Fourth, a significant portion of U.S. GDP is driven by
large companies, which tend to grow more slowly. Since we measure the
median corporate growth rates, the median company is typically small, and
small public companies grow faster. Finally, although we use rolling averages and medians, we can only dampen the effects of M&A and currency
fluctuations, not eliminate them entirely.
In addition to mapping median growth, Exhibit 6.15 reveals a second
point: beginning in 1973, one-quarter of all companies actually shrank in
real terms in a given year. Thus, although most companies publicly project
healthy growth over the next five years, reality dictates that many mature
firms will shrink in real terms. When you perform a valuation of a mature
business, treat projections of strong growth skeptically.
Like the results concerning ROIC, the spread of growth rates across industries varies dramatically. In Exhibit 6.16, we present median revenue
growth rates for 20 industries. The median Software and Services company has grown by 20 percent between 1963 and 2003, Semiconductors

Exhibit 6.16 Revenue Growth by Industry Group1
percent
Annual real revenue growth2
1963–2003
Software and Services
Semiconductors and Semiconductor Equipment
Health Care Equipment and Services
Technology Hardware and Equipment
Pharmaceuticals and Biotechnology
Commercial Services and Supplies
Telecommunication Services
Hotels, Restaurants and Leisure
Energy
Media
Retailing
Transportation
Food and Staples Retailing
Total Sample
Automobiles and Components
Household and Personal Products
Capital Goods
Consumer Durables and Apparel
Utilities
Food, Beverage and Tobacco
Materials

1
Based on S&P Global Industry Classification Standard.
2

1994–2003
20.1

19.9
15.4
13.1
10.5
9.9
9.4
9.3
8.5
8.3
7.7
7.6
7.4
6.3
6.3
5.9
5.4
5.1
4.8
4.5
4.3
3.9

Geometric mean of annual median.
Source: Compustat, McKinsey & Company‘s corporate performance database.

16.1
13.8
10.1
15.6
11.0
18.5
8.0
14.8
9.2
8.6
6.8
5.3
8.0
7.9
4.6
5.9
4.6
4.2
3.3
3.8

156

THINKING ABOUT RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL AND GROWTH

and Semiconductor Equipment has grown at 15 percent, and Health Care
Equipment and Services has grown by 13 percent. Basic staples—such as
Consumer Durables and Apparel; Utilities; Food, Beverage, and Tobacco;
and Materials—all have grown less than 5 percent in real terms, only
slightly higher than real GDP growth.
Yet, unlike the ROIC ranking, the ranking of industries based on
growth varies over time. Between 1994 and 2003, Pharmaceuticals and
Biotechnology, Telecommunication Services, and Energy each grew at
rates well above long-term averages. For Energy, the recent level of higher
growth is primarily driven by M&A, as energy companies consolidated
during the 1990s (U.S. energy consumption rose by only 1 percent from
1994 to 2003). For Pharmaceuticals and Biotechnology and for Telecommunication Services, the results are a mixture of organic growth and M&A.
Although significant consolidation took place during the 1990s, organic
pharmaceutical revenues rose substantially with the development of many
blockbuster drugs.

Decay Rates for Corporate Growth
Developing an accurate revenue growth forecast is critical to valuation. Yet
building tempered projections is challenging, especially given the upward
bias shown by research analysts and the media. For instance, empirical research has found that analysts are overly optimistic in their earnings forecasts following initial public offerings (IPOs) relative to a control sample.8
This upward forecast bias also holds on a broader scale. In Exhibit 6.17, we
plot analyst forecasts of aggregate earnings for the S&P 500 versus actual
results from 1985 through 2000. Each line plots median earnings forecasts
for a particular year and shows how they changed as actual results came
closer. In nearly every year, the actual results are lower than forecast. In addition, the longer the forecast (measured up to four years), the more overly
optimistic the forecast typically is.
To keep long-term corporate growth rates in their proper perspective,
we present historical growth decay rates over the past 40 years. Companies
were segmented into five portfolios, depending on their growth rate at
portfolio formation. In Exhibit 6.18 on page 158, we plot how each portfolio’s median company grows over time. As the exhibit shows, growth decays
very quickly; for the typical company, high growth is not sustainable.
Within three years, the difference across portfolios dampens considerably,
and by year 5, the highest-growth portfolio outperforms the lowest-growth
portfolio by less than 5 percentage points. Within 10 years, this difference
8
R. Rajan and H. Servaes, “Analyst Following of Initial Public Offerings,” Journal of Finance, 52(3)
(1997): 507–529.

AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF CORPORATE GROWTH

157

Exhibit 6.17 Aggregate EPS Forecasts for S&P 500 Constituents
EPS (U.S. cents)
80
70

03

60

02
00

50
99
97

40
95
30

96

94
88

20
10

01

98

85

86

87

89

93
90

91

92

0
1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Source: IBES, McKinsey analysis.

drops to less than 2 percentage points. Comparing the decay of growth with
that of ROIC, we see that although ROIC is persistent (top companies outperform bottom companies by more than 10 percentage points after 15
years), growth is not.
So why do companies struggle to maintain growth? As with ROIC,
strong growth at high returns on capital attracts competition. More importantly, size, saturation, and growth itself are to blame. As the company
grows, its revenue base increases, and growing at 20 percent on $200 billion
of revenue is much harder than growing at 20 percent on $200 million. Remember, a company that grows at 20 percent will double in size in less than
four years. Growth at this rate places many demands on the company and
its management, making future growth ever more difficult.
Moreover, since every product market has a limited size, even the best
performers must eventually track market growth. Most large companies
struggle to grow once they reach a certain size. Exhibit 6.19 on page 159 reports results compiled by the Corporate Executive Board concerning the real
revenue growth rate surrounding entrance into the Fortune 50.9 Although

9

Corporate Executive Board, “Stall Points: Barriers to Growth for the Large Corporate Enterprise” (1998).

158

THINKING ABOUT RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL AND GROWTH

Exhibit 6.18 Revenue Growth Decay Analysis
Median growth of portfolio1
35

Revenue
growth
(percent)
>20
15–20
10–15
5–10
<5

30
25

Percent

20
15
10
5
0
-5
0

1

2

3

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11 12
Number of years following portfolio formation

13

14

15

1

At year 0, companies are grouped into one of five portfolios, based on revenue growth.
Source: Compustat, McKinsey & Company’s corporate performance database.

growth is strong before companies enter the Fortune 50 (often because of
acquisitions), growth drops dramatically after inclusion. In the five years
before entrance, real revenue growth varies between 9 percent and 20 percent. And although the year immediately following entrance is high (28.6
percent), in every subsequent year, growth is quite low. In fact, during 5 of
the 15 years after inclusion, companies actually shrink (in real terms).
In analyzing Exhibits 6.18 and 6.19 it becomes evident that the typical
firm cannot maintain supernormal revenue growth. But are there companies that can beat the norm? In short, the answer is no. Exhibit 6.20,
which reports the transition probabilities from one grouping to another,
shows that maintaining high growth is uncommon. For example, 67 percent of the companies reporting less than 5 percent revenue growth
in 1994 continued to report growth below 5 percent 10 years later. The
same is also true for high-growth companies: 56 percent of companies
growing faster than 20 percent in 1994 grew at real rates below 5 percent
10 years later. Only 13 percent of high-growth companies maintained 20
percent real growth 10 years later, most of which was probably driven by
acquisitions.

SUMMARY

159

Exhibit 6.19 Revenue Growth Rate Falls Dramatically for Companies
Reaching Fortune 50
Average annual real revenue growth rate, percent
28.6

Before entrance to Fortune 50
After entrance to Fortune 50

20.0
15.0

13.5
9.5 9.0
2.1 2.8
0.7 1.2 0.1

2.0 1.4

5.1 4.5

–0.7 –0.7

–1.6

–0.1
–3.9

–5

–4

–3

–2

–1

0

1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Years from entrance into Fortune 50

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

Source: Corporate Executive Board, “Stall Points: Barriers to Growth for the Large Corporate Enterprise” (1998).

SUMMARY
A valuation based on discounted cash flow is only as good as the model’s
forecasts. Yet, all too often, we get caught up in the details of a company’s financial statements and forget the economic fundamentals: A company’s valuation is driven by ROIC and growth. Thus, when you perform a valuation,
it is critical to evaluate how your forecasts of ROIC and growth relate to the
economics of the industry and how your results compare with the historical
performance of companies that came before.

Exhibit 6.20 Revenue Growth Transition Probability, 1994–2003
Three-year rolling average of real revenue growth rate, percent

Revenue growth in 1994

Revenue growth in 2003
<5

5–10

<5

67

15

5–10

64

16

10–15

61

15

15–20

59

11

>20

56

13

Source: Compustat, McKinsey & Company’s corporate performance database.

15–20

10–15
8

>20

Total

3

7

100

12

3

5

100

11

4

9

100

14

5

11

100

13

100

10

8

160

THINKING ABOUT RETURN ON INVESTED CAPITAL AND GROWTH

In this chapter, we have explored elements of value creation: price premium, cost competitiveness, capital efficiency, and sustainability. If you
plan to forecast large returns on capital and high levels of growth, make sure
you can explicitly point to the company’s source of competitive advantage.
In addition, make sure any forecasts—even those for which the company’s
advantages are clear—are within reasonable historical bounds. Otherwise,
you may generate an unrealistic valuation and find yourself caught in yet
another speculative bubble.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Identify and discuss three sources of competitive advantage that
could lead to increases in ROIC.
2. Referring to the key value driver formula, explain why this formula
might work well for an established company, whereas for either a
startup or rapidly growing company, the key value driver formula is
inappropriate.
3. Explain how proper “branding” of corporate products could lead to
sustained periods of high ROIC.
4. What factors would lead ROIC to be significantly different across industrial lines? Why might companies operating within the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries be able to sustain higher
ROICs than firms in the technology hardware and equipment and
the retailing industries?
5. What does economic theory predict about long-run ROIC? Is historical evidence consistent with these predictions?
6. How might the key value driver approach to corporate valuation be
adjusted to incorporate the unique growth characteristics of a nonconstant growth firm?
7. Why might large firms experience lower rates of growth than smaller
firms? What is the danger of having a large company attempt to
match the growth of a small company?

7
Analyzing Historical
Performance

Understanding a company’s past is essential for forecasting its future.
For that reason, we begin the valuation process by analyzing historical performance. Since the financial statements are not designed for valuation,
historical analysis can be challenging. To properly evaluate a company’s
performance, it is therefore necessary to rearrange the accounting statements,
dig for new information in the footnotes, and, where information is missing,
make informed assumptions. Only then will the company’s previous performance, competitive position, and ability to generate cash in the future come
into focus. To analyze a company’s historical performance:
• Reorganize the financial statements to reflect economic, instead of
accounting, performance, creating such new terms as net operating
profit less adjusted taxes (NOPLAT), invested capital, and free cash
flow (FCF).
• Measure and analyze the company’s return on invested capital (ROIC)
and economic profit to evaluate the company’s ability to create value.
• Break down revenue growth into its four components: organic revenue growth, currency effects, acquisitions, and accounting changes.
• Assess the company’s financial health and capital structure to determine whether it has the financial resources to conduct business and
make short- and long-term investments.
The final section of this chapter covers advanced issues in financial
analysis, such as capitalizing expenses (e.g., operating leases and R&D),
stock-based compensation, retirement plans, provisions and loss reserves,
161

162

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

and inflation. Immediately following this chapter, we apply the principles
to Heineken, the Dutch brewer. The Heineken case continues through Part
Two of the book.

REORGANIZING THE ACCOUNTING STATEMENTS: KEY CONCEPTS
Most companies report in their financial statements return on assets
(ROA), return on equity (ROE), and cash flow from operations (CFO). Nonoperating items such as nonoperating assets and capital structure, however,
bias these measures.1 To properly ground our historical analysis, we need
to separate operating performance from nonoperating items and the financing obtained to support the business. The resulting measures, ROIC and
FCF, are independent of leverage and focus solely on the operating performance of a business.
To build ROIC and FCF, we need to reorganize the balance sheet to create invested capital and likewise reorganize the income statement to create
net operating profit less adjusted taxes (NOPLAT). Invested capital represents the total investor capital required to fund operations, without distinction to how the capital is financed. NOPLAT represents the total after-tax
operating income (generated by the company’s invested capital) that is
available to all financial investors. (Although choice of capital structure will
affect valuation, this will be handled through the cost of capital, not
through ROIC or FCF.) Return on invested capital and free cash flow both
rely on NOPLAT and invested capital. ROIC is defined as
ROIC =

NOPLAT
Invested Capital

and free cash flow is defined as
FCF = NOPLAT + Noncash Operating Expenses − Investment in Invested Capital

By combining noncash operating expenses, such as depreciation with investment in invested capital, we can also express FCF as2
FCF = NOPLAT − Net Increase in Invested Capital
1

As financial leverage rises, net income will fall due to increased interest expenses. This will
cause return on assets to fall, even if the operating performance remains unchanged. Return on
equity also commingles operating performance with financial leverage. Specifically, ROE rises
with leverage when ROIC is greater than the company’s after-tax interest rate on debt, and it
falls with leverage when ROIC is less than the company’s after-tax interest rate.
2
This follows directly from the relation that invested capitalt+1 equals invested capitalt plus invest ment in invested capital minus any noncash charges that reduce invested capital.

REORGANIZING THE ACCOUNTING STATEMENTS: KEY CONCEPTS

163

Invested Capital: Key Concepts
To build an economic balance sheet that separates a company’s operating
assets from its nonoperating assets and financial structure, we start with
the traditional balance sheet. The accountant’s balance sheet is bound by
the most fundamental rule of accounting,
Assets = Liabilities + Equity

For single-product companies, assets consist primarily of operating assets (OA), such as receivables, inventory, and property, plant, and equipment (PP&E). Liabilities consist of operating liabilities (OL), such as
accounts payable and accrued salaries, and interest-bearing debt (D), such
as notes payable and long-term debt. Equity (E) will consist of common
stock, possibly preferred stock, and retained earnings. Using this more explicit breakdown of assets, liabilities, and equity leads to an expanded version of the balance sheet relation:
Operating Assets = Operating Liabilities + Debt + Equity

The traditional balance sheet equation, however, mixes operating liabilities and investor capital on the right side of the equation. Moving operating
liabilities to the left side of the equation leads to “invested capital”:
Operating Assets − Operating Liabilities = Invested Capital = Debt + Equity

With this new equation, we have rearranged the balance sheet to better
reflect invested capital used for operations, and net financing provided by
investors to fund operations. Note how invested capital can be calculated
using the operating method, that is, operating assets minus operating liabilities, or the financing method, which equals debt plus equity.
For most companies, our last equation is overly simplistic. Assets consist not only of core operating assets, but also of nonoperating assets, such
as marketable securities, prepaid pension assets, nonconsolidated subsidiaries, and other equity investments. Liabilities consist not only of operating liabilities and interest-bearing debt, but also of debt equivalents (DE),
such as unfunded retirement liabilities and restructuring reserves, and equity equivalents (EE), such as deferred taxes and income-smoothing provisions (we explain equivalents in detail later in the chapter). Expanding our
original balance sheet equation:
OA
NOA
OL
D + DE
E + EE
Operating + Nonoperating = Operating +
Debt and
+ Equity and
Assets
Assets
Liabilities
Its Equivalents Its Equivalents

164

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 7.1 An Example of Invested Capital
$ million
Accountant’s Balance Sheet

Invested Capital

Assets

Prior Current
year
year

Inventory
Net PP&E
Equity investments
Total assets

200
300
15
515

Liabilities and equity
Accounts payable
Interest-bearing debt
Common stock
Retained earnings
Total liabilities and
equity

125
225
50
115
515

225
350
25
600
150
200
50
200
600

Prior
year

Current
year

Inventory
Accounts payable
Operating working capital

200
(125)
75

225
(150)
75

Net PP&E
Invested capital

300
375

350
425

Equity investments
Total funds invested

15
390

25
450

Total funds invested
Interest-bearing debt
Common stock
Retained earnings
Total funds invested

225
50
115
390

200
50
200
450

Operating liabilities
are netted against
operating assets.

Nonoperating assets
are not included in
invested capital.

Rearranging leads to the derivation of “total funds invested”:
OA − OL
NOA
Total
D + DE
E + EE
Invested + Nonoperating = Funds = Debt and + Equity and
Capital
Assets
Invested Its Equivalents Its Equivalents

From an investing perspective, total funds invested equals invested
capital plus nonoperating assets. From the financing perspective, total
funds invested equals debt and its equivalents, plus equity and its equivalents. Exhibit 7.1 rearranges the balance sheet into invested capital for a
simple hypothetical company with only a few line items. A more sophisticated example, using real companies, is developed in the next section.

Net Operating Profit Less Adjusted Taxes: Key Concepts
Invested capital makes no distinction between debt and equity. Rather, invested capital combines the two sources of investor funds and treats them
equally. In a similar fashion, net operating profit less adjusted taxes (NOPLAT) aggregates the operating income generated by invested capital. Unlike net income, NOPLAT includes profits available to both debt holders and
equity holders.
To calculate NOPLAT, we reorganize the accountant’s income statement (see Exhibit 7.2) in three fundamental ways. First, interest is not sub-

REORGANIZING THE ACCOUNTING STATEMENTS: KEY CONCEPTS

165

Exhibit 7.2 An Example of NOPLAT
$ million
Accountant’s income statement

NOPLAT

Current
year
Revenues
Operating costs
Depreciation
Operating profit

Current
year

1,000
(700)
(20)
280

Revenues
Operating costs
Depreciation
Operating profit

1,000
(700)
(20)
280

Interest
Nonoperating income
Earnings before taxes (EBT)

(20)
4
264

Operating taxes1
NOPLAT

(70)
210

Taxes
Net income

(66)
198

After-tax nonoperating income1
Total income to all investors

3
213

Reconciliation with net income
Net income
After-tax interest1
Total income to all investors

198
15
213

Taxes are calculated on
operating profits.
Do not include income
from any asset excluded
from invested capital as
part of NOPLAT.
Treat interest as a
financial payout to
investors, not an
expense.

1

Assumes a flat tax of 25% on all income.

tracted from operating profit. Interest is considered a payment to the company’s financial investors, not an operating expense. By reclassifying interest as a financing item, we make NOPLAT independent of the company’s
capital structure.
Second, when calculating after-tax operating profit, exclude any nonoperating income, gains, or losses generated from assets that were excluded from invested capital. Mistakenly including nonoperating income
in NOPLAT, without including the assets in invested capital, will lead to
an inconsistent definition of ROIC (the numerator and denominator will
consist of different elements).
Finally, since reported taxes are calculated after interest and nonoperating income, they are a function of nonoperating items and capital structure.
Keeping NOPLAT focused solely on operations requires that the effects of
interest expense and nonoperating income also be removed from taxes. To
calculate operating taxes, start with reported taxes, add back the tax shield
caused by interest expense, and remove the taxes paid for nonoperating income. The resulting operating taxes should equal the hypothetical taxes
that would be reported by an all-equity, pure operating company.
You may wonder how we will take into account the value of the tax
shield. Given that interest is tax deductible, the deduction provides an important source of value to the company. But rather than model tax shields in
NOPLAT, we will model all financing costs (including interest and its tax
shield) in the cost of capital. Similarly, taxes for nonoperating income must
be accounted for, and should be netted directly against the nonoperating income, not as part of NOPLAT.

166

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Return on Invested Capital: Key Concepts
With our newly reorganized financial statements, we can now measure
total investor capital and the after-tax operating income generated from
those investments. ROIC measures the ratio of NOPLAT to invested capital:
ROIC =

NOPLAT
Invested Capital

Since NOPLAT and invested capital are independent of financial structure and nonoperating assets, so is ROIC. And by using ROIC, we can now
measure how the company’s core operating performance has changed and
how the company compares with its competitors, without the effects of financial structure and other nonoperating items distorting the analysis.

Free Cash Flow: Key Concepts
To value a company’s core operations, we discount projected free cash flow
at an appropriate risk-adjusted cost of capital. Free cash flow is the after-tax
cash flow available to all investors: debt holders and equity holders. Unlike
“cash flow from operations” reported in a company’s financial statement,
free cash flow is independent of financing and nonoperating items. It can
be thought of as the after-tax cash flow—as if the company held only core
operating assets and financed the business entirely with equity. Free cash
flow is defined as:
FCF = NOPLAT + Noncash Operating Expenses − Investments in Invested Capital

As shown in Exhibit 7.3, free cash flow excludes nonoperating flows and
items related to capital structure. Unlike the accountant’s cash flow statement, the free cash flow statement starts with NOPLAT (versus net income). As discussed earlier, NOPLAT excludes nonoperating income and
interest expense. Instead, interest (and its tax shield) is treated as a financing cash flow.
Net investments in nonoperating assets and the gains, losses, and income associated with these nonoperating assets are not included in free
cash flow. Instead, nonoperating cash flows should be valued separately.
Combining free cash flow and nonoperating cash flow leads to cash flow
available to investors. As is true with total funds invested and profit available to all investors, cash flow available to investors can be calculated using
two methodologies: “origin of cash flow” and “to whom the cash flow belongs.” Although the two seem redundant, using both methods can help
you avoid line item omissions and classification pitfalls.

REORGANIZING THE ACCOUNTING STATEMENTS: IN PRACTICE

167

Exhibit 7.3 An Example of Free Cash Flow
$ million
Accountant’s cash flow statement

Net income
Depreciation
Decrease (increase) in inventory
Increase (decrease) in accounts payable
Cash flow from operations

Free cash flow
Current
year
198
20
(25)
25
218

Capital expenditures
Decrease (increase) in equity investments
Cash flow from investing

(70)
(10)
(80)

Increase (decrease) in interest-bearing debt
Increase (decrease) in common stock
Dividends
Cash flow from financing

(25)
0
(113)
(138)

NOPLAT
Depreciation
Gross cash flow

Current
year
210
20
230

Decrease (increase) in inventory
Increase (decrease) in accounts payable
Capital expenditures
Gross investment

(25)
25
(70)
(70)

Free cash flow

160

After-tax nonoperating income
Decrease (increase) in equity investments
Cash flow available to investors

3
(10)
153

After-tax interest expense
Increase (decrease) in interest-bearing debt
Increase (decrease) in common stock
Dividends
Cash flow available to investors

15
25
0
113
153

• Treat interest as a financial payout to investors, not as an expense.
• Investments in operating items are subtracted from gross cash flow.
• Cash flow from nonoperating assets should be evaluated separately from core operations.

REORGANIZING THE ACCOUNTING STATEMENTS: IN PRACTICE
Reorganizing the statements can be difficult, even for the savviest analyst.
Which items are operating assets? Which are nonoperating? Which items
should be treated as debt? As equity? In the following pages, we address
these questions through an examination of Home Depot, the world’s largest
home improvement retailer, with stores located throughout North America.
The company has grown rapidly over the past 10 years, generating strong
returns and cash flow. But its core markets have become increasingly saturated, and the company now faces new challenges.

Invested Capital: In Practice
Invested capital equals operating assets minus operating liabilities. Total
funds invested equals invested capital plus nonoperating assets. Alternatively,

168

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 7.4 Home Depot and Lowe’s: Historical Balance Sheet
$ million
Home Depot

Lowe’s

Assets

2001

2002

2003

2001

2002

2003

Cash and cash equivalents
Short-term investments
Receivables, net
Merchandise inventories
Other current assets
Total current assets

2,477
69
920
6,725
170
10,361

2,188
65
1,072
8,338
254
11,917

2,826
26
1,097
9,076
303
13,328

799
54
166
3,611
291
4,920

853
273
172
3,068
302
5,568

1,446
178
131
4,584
348
6,687

Net property and equipment
Long-term investments
Acquired intangibles and goodwill
Other assets
Total assets

15,375
83
419
156
26,394

17,168
107
575
244
30,011

20,063
84
833
129
34,437

8,653
22
0
141
13,736

10,352
29
0
160
16,109

11,945
169
0
241
19,042

Liabilities and equity
Short-term debt
Accounts payable
Accrued salaries
Deferred revenue
Other accrued expenses
Total current liabilities

2001
211
3,436
717
933
1,204
6,501

2002
0
4,560
809
998
1,668
8,035

2003
509
5,159
801
1,281
1,804
9,554

2001
159
1,715
347
0
796
3,017

2002
79
1,943
394
0
1,162
3,578

2003
77
2,366
409
0
1,516
4,368

Long-term debt
Deferred income taxes
Other long-term liabilities

1,250
189
372

1,321
362
491

856
967
653

3,734
305
6

3,736
478
15

3,678
657
30

Net common stock and paid-in capital
Retained earnings
Accumulated other comp income
Total liabilities and equity

5,503
12,799
(220)
26,394

3,913
15,971
(82)
30,011

2,637
19,680
90
34,437

2,192
4,482
1
13,736

2,414
5,887
1
16,109

2,631
7,677
1
19,042

total funds invested equals debt and its equivalents plus equity and its
equivalents:
OA − OL
NOA
Total
D + DE
E + EE
Invested + Nonoperating = Funds = Debt and + Equity and
Capital
Assets
Invested Its Equivalents Its Equivalents

In Exhibit 7.4, we present balance sheets for Home Depot and Lowe’s (a direct competitor of Home Depot). We next set each element of the preceding
equation against those figures.
For simplicity, we previously defined invested capital as operating assets
minus operating liabilities (OA − OL). Most financial analysts, however, separate invested capital into operating working capital (current operating assets less current operating liabilities), fixed assets (e.g., net property, plant,

REORGANIZING THE ACCOUNTING STATEMENTS: IN PRACTICE

169

Exhibit 7.5 Home Depot and Lowe’s: Invested Capital Calculation
$ million
Home Depot

Lowe’s

2001

2002

2003

2001

2002

2003

Working cash
Receivables, net
Merchandise inventories
Other current assets
Operating current assets

1,027
920
6,725
170
8,842

1,117
1,072
8,338
254
10,781

1,243
1,097
9,076
303
11,719

424
166
3,611
291
4,491

508
172
3,968
302
4,950

591
131
4,584
348
5,654

Accounts payable
Accrued salaries
Deferred revenue
Other accrued expenses
Operating current liabilities

3,436
717
933
1,204
6,290

4,560
809
998
1,668
8,035

5,159
801
1,281
1,804
9,045

1,715
347
0
796
2,858

1,943
394
0
1,162
3,499

2,366
409
0
1,516
4,291

Operating working capital
Net property and equipment
Capitalized operating leases1
Net other assets
Invested capital (excluding goodwill)

2,552
15,375
5,459
(216)
23,170

2,746
17,168
5,890
(247)
25,557

2,674
20,063
6,554
(524)
28,767

1,634
8,653
2,189
134
12,611

1,451
10,352
2,373
145
14,321

1,363
11,945
2,762
211
16,281

Acquired intangibles and goodwill
419
Cumulative amortization and pooled goodwill 2
46
Invested capital (including goodwill)
23,635

575
54
26,185

833
55
29,655

0
730
13,341

0
730
15,051

0
730
17,012

Excess cash
Long-term investments
Total funds invested

1,519
83
25,237

1,136
107
27,428

1,609
84
31,348

429
22
13,792

618
29
15,698

1,033
169
18,213

2001

2002

2003

2001

2002

2003

Short-term debt
Long-term debt
Capitalized operating leases1
Debt and debt equivalents

211
1,250
5,459
6,920

0
1,321
5,890
7,211

509
856
6,554
7,919

159
3,734
2,189
6,082

79
3,736
2,373
6,188

77
3,678
2,762
6,517

Deferred income taxes
Cumulative amortization and pooled goodwill 2
Net common stock and paid-in-capital
Retained earnings
Accumulated other comp income
Equity and equity equivalents

189
46
5,503
12,799
(220)
18,317

362
54
3,913
15,971
(82)
20,218

967
55
2,637
19,680
90
23,429

305
730
2,192
4,482
1
7,709

478
730
2,414
5,887
1
9,510

657
730
2,631
7,677
1
11,696

Total funds invested

25,237

27,428

31,348

13,792

15,698

18,213

1
Capitalized operating lease adjustments are detailed in Exhibit 7.21.
2

Goodwill and cumulative amortization adjustments are detailed in Exhibit 7.6.

and equipment), intangible assets (e.g., goodwill), and net other long-term
operating assets (net of long-term operating liabilities). Exhibit 7.5 demonstrates this line-by-line aggregation for Home Depot and Lowe’s. In the following subsections, we examine each element in detail.

Operating working capital Operating working capital equals operating
current assets, net of operating current liabilities. Operating current assets

170

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

comprise all current assets necessary for the operation of the business, including working cash balances, trade accounts receivable, inventory, and
prepaid expenses. Specifically excluded are excess cash and marketable securities, that is, cash greater than the operating needs of the business.3 Excess cash generally represents temporary imbalances in the company’s cash
position and is discussed later in this section.
Non-interest-bearing operating current liabilities include those liabilities that are related to the ongoing operations of the firm. The most common
operating liabilities are those related to suppliers (accounts payable), employees (accrued salaries), customers (deferred revenue),4 and the government (income taxes payable). If a liability is deemed operating versus
financial, it should be netted from operating assets to determine invested
capital.
Some argue that operating liabilities, such as accounts payable, are a
form of financing and should be treated no differently than debt. This
would lead to an inconsistent definition of NOPLAT and invested capital.
NOPLAT is the income available to both debt and equity holders and therefore, when determining ROIC, should be divided by debt plus equity. Although a supplier may charge customers implicit interest for the right to
pay in 30 days, the charge is an indistinguishable part of the price, and
hence an indistinguishable part of the cost of goods sold. Since cost of goods
sold is subtracted from revenue to determine NOPLAT, operating liabilities
must be subtracted from operating assets to determine invested capital.5

Net property, plant, and equipment The book value of net property, plant,
and equipment (e.g., production equipment and facilities) is always included in operating assets. Situations that require using the market value or
replacement cost are discussed in the section on advanced issues.
Acquired intangibles and goodwill Whether to include acquired intangibles and goodwill as part of invested capital depends on the type of analysis being performed. To prepare for these later analyses, measure invested
capital with and without goodwill. Then, to properly evaluate goodwill,
make two adjustments. First, unlike other fixed assets, goodwill does not
wear out, nor is it replaceable. Therefore, adjust reported goodwill upward
3

In the company’s financial statements, accountants often distinguish between cash and marketable securities, but not between working cash and excess cash. We provide guidance on distinguishing working from excess cash later in the chapter.
4
Retailers, such as Home Depot and Lowe’s, receive customer prepayments from gift cards, prepaid product installations, and anticipated customer returns (for which funds are received but
revenue is not recognized).
5
Alternatively, we could add back the estimated financing cost associated with any operating
liabilities to NOPLAT and not subtract the operating liabilities from operating assets. This approach, however, requires information not readily available.

REORGANIZING THE ACCOUNTING STATEMENTS: IN PRACTICE

171

Exhibit 7.6 Home Depot and Lowe’s: Adjustments to Goodwill
$ million
Home Depot

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Reported goodwill
Adjustments for merger accounting
Cumulative amortization and impairments
Adjusted goodwill

311
0
30
341

314
0
38
352

419
0
46
465

575
0
54
629

833
0
55
888

Lowe’s

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Reported goodwill
Adjustments for merger accounting
Cumulative amortization and impairments
Adjusted goodwill

0
730
0
730

0
730
0
730

0
730
0
730

0
730
0
730

0
730
0
730

to recapture historical amortization and impairments.6 (To maintain consistency, amortization and impairments will not be deducted from revenues
to determine NOPLAT).
Second, any unrecorded goodwill (due to the old pooling of interest/
merger accounting) must be added to recorded goodwill. Consider Lowe’s acquisition of Eagle Garden & Hardware. Since the acquisition was recorded
using pooling, no goodwill was recognized. Had Lowe’s used purchase accounting, the company would have recorded $730 million in goodwill.7 To
include pooling transactions, estimate and record the incremental goodwill
while simultaneously adjusting equity to represent the value of shares
given away.
In Exhibit 7.6, cumulative amortization and impairments are added
back to Home Depot’s recorded goodwill. The exhibit also shows Lowe’s recapitalized goodwill from the Eagle Garden & Hardware acquisition.

Net other long-term operating assets If other long-term assets and liabilities are small—and not detailed by the company—we can assume that they
are operating. To determine net other long-term operating assets, subtract
other long-term liabilities from other long-term assets. This figure should
be included as part of invested capital.
6
The recent implementation of new accounting standards (in 2001 for the United States and
2005 for Europe) radically changed the way that companies account for acquisitions. Today,
whether paid in cash or stock, acquisitions must be recorded on the balance sheet using the purchase methodology. Second, goodwill is no longer amortized. Instead, the company periodically tests the level of goodwill to determine whether the acquired business has lost value. If it
has, goodwill is impaired (written down).
7
On the final day of trading, Eagle had 29.1 million shares outstanding at a price of $37.75.
Thus, Lowe’s paid approximately $1.1 billion. According to its last 10-Q, Eagle had only $370
million in total equity. Goodwill equals $1.1 billion less $370 million, or $730 million.

172

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

If, however, the other long-term assets account is relatively large, it
might include nonoperating items such as deferred tax assets, prepaid pension assets, intangible assets related to pensions, nonconsolidated subsidiaries, and other equity investments. Nonoperating items should not be
included in invested capital.
Long-term liabilities can also include operating and nonoperating items.
Long-term operating liabilities are liabilities that result directly from an ongoing operating activity. For instance, Home Depot warranties some products beyond one year, collecting customer funds today but recognizing the
revenue only as the warranty expires. Most long-term liabilities are not operating liabilities, but rather what we deem debt and equity equivalents. These
include unfunded pension liabilities, unfunded postretirement medical
costs, restructuring reserves, and deferred taxes.
Where can you find the breakdown of other assets and other liabilities?
In some cases, companies provide a table in the footnotes. Most of the time,
however, you must work through the footnotes, note by note, searching for
items aggregated within other assets and liabilities. For instance, in 2003,
Lockheed Martin detailed an intangible asset related to pensions in the
pension footnote but nowhere else in its annual report.

Hidden assets and their respective financing Up to now, we have focused
on reorganizing items that appear on the balance sheet. But there are two
other items that accountants fail to capitalize: operating leases and investments masquerading as expenses (e.g., research and development). If these
hidden assets are significant, we recommend the following adjustments:
• When a company leases an asset under certain conditions, it need not
record either an asset or a liability. To properly compare across companies with different leasing policies, you should include the value
of the lease as an operating asset, with a corresponding debt
recorded as a financing item. Otherwise, companies that lease assets
will appear “capital light” relative to identical companies that purchase the assets.
• Given the conservative principles of accounting, accountants expense research and development (R&D), advertising, and certain
other expenses in their entirety, even when the economic benefits of
the expense continue beyond the current reporting period. If possible, R&D and other quasi investments should be capitalized and
amortized in a manner similar to capital expenditures. Equity
should be adjusted correspondingly to balance the invested capital
equation.
The specific treatment of operating leases and R&D expenses is detailed later in this chapter.

REORGANIZING THE ACCOUNTING STATEMENTS: IN PRACTICE

173

Nonoperating assets Invested capital represents the capital necessary to
operate a company’s core business. In addition to invested capital, companies can also own nonoperating assets, both liquid and illiquid. Liquid
assets include excess cash, marketable securities, and certain financing
receivables (e.g., credit card receivables). Illiquid assets include equity investments and excess pension assets. We address excess cash, illiquid investments, and other nonoperating assets like excess pension assets next.
Excess cash and marketable securities Do not include excess cash in invested
capital. By its definition, excess cash is unnecessary for core operations.
Rather than mix excess cash with core operations, therefore, you should
analyze and value excess cash separately.
Given its liquidity and low risk, excess cash will earn very small returns. Therefore, failing to separate excess cash from core operations will
incorrectly depress the company’s apparent ROIC. Home Depot’s ROIC in
2003 was 18.2 percent. Had excess cash been included as part of invested
capital, Home Depot’s ROIC would have been incorrectly measured as 17.4
percent.
Companies do not disclose how much cash they deem necessary for
operations. Nor does the accountant’s definition of cash versus marketable securities distinguish working cash from excess cash. To estimate
the size of working cash, we examined the cash holdings of the S&P 500
nonfinancial companies. Between 1993 and 2000, the companies with the
smallest cash balances held cash just below 2 percent of sales. If this is a
good proxy for working cash, any cash above 2 percent should be considered excess.8
This aggregate figure, however, is not a rule. Required cash holdings
vary by industry. For instance, one study found that companies in industries with higher cash flow volatility hold higher cash balances.9 To assess
the minimum cash needed to support operations, look for a minimum clustering of cash to revenue across the industry.
Illiquid investments, nonconsolidated subsidiaries, and other equity investments If
possible, interest-generating customer loans (e.g., credit card receivables
and other long-term customer financing), nonconsolidated subsidiaries, and
other equity investments should be measured and valued separately from
invested capital. Evaluating customer financing and equity investments
8
Companies in economies with poor shareholder protections tend to hold more cash. Therefore,
in economies with poor shareholder protections, median (or bottom quartile) cash holdings
might overestimate the amount of working cash truly needed. A. Ditt mar, J. Mahrt-Smith, and
H. Servaes “International Corporate Governance and Corporate Cash Holdings,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis (forthcoming).
9
T. Opler, L. Pinkowitz, R. Stulz, and R. Williamson, “The Determinants and Implications of
Corporate Cash Holdings,” Journal of Financial Economics, 52(1) (1999): 3 – 46.

174

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

separately requires excluding these accounts from invested capital and excluding their respective income from NOPLAT. Companies do not always
clearly separate sources of income, so we are sometimes forced to aggregate
certain nonoperating assets within invested capital.
Prepaid and intangible pension assets If a company runs a defined-benefit
plan for its employees, it must fund the plan each year. And if a company
funds its plan faster than its pension expenses dictate, under U.S. Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), the company can recognize a portion of the excess assets on the balance sheet. Pension assets are considered
a nonoperating asset and not part of invested capital. Their value is important to the equity holder, so they will be valued later, but separately from
core operations. We examine pension assets in detail in the section on advanced issues.
Total funds invested can be calculated as invested capital plus nonoperating assets, or as the sum of net debt, equity, and equity equivalents. We
next examine the right-hand side of the “total funds invested” equation.

Other nonoperating assets, such as excess real
estate and discontinued operations, should also be excluded from invested
capital.
Other nonoperating assets

Debt Debt includes any short-term or long-term interest-bearing liability.
Short-term debt includes commercial paper, notes payable, and the current
portion of long-term debt. Long-term debt includes fixed debt, floating
debt, and convertible debt with maturities of more than a year.
Debt equivalents such as retirement liabilities and operating leases If a
company’s defined-benefit plan is underfunded, it must recognize a portion
of the underfunding as a liability. The amount of underfunding is not an
operating liability. Rather, we treat unfunded pension expenses and unfunded postretirement medical expenses as a debt equivalent (and treat the
net interest expense associated with these liabilities as nonoperating). It is
as if the company must borrow money to fund the plan.
Treating unfunded retirement expenses as debt might seem hypothetical, but for some companies the issue has become real. In June 2003, General
Motors issued $17 billion in debt, using the proceeds to reduce its pension
shortfall, not to fund operations.10

10

R. Barley and C. Evans, “GM Plans Record Bond Sale Thursday to Plug Pension Gap,” Reuters
News ( June 26, 2003).

REORGANIZING THE ACCOUNTING STATEMENTS: IN PRACTICE

175

As discussed in the section on hidden assets, a company with substantial operating leases should capitalize those leases, recognizing them both
as an asset and as a debt. The resulting liability from capitalizing operating
leases should be treated as a debt equivalent. For some companies, such as
retailers, operating leases can increase debt dramatically. This helps explain why some retailers, such as the Gap, have sub-A credit ratings even
with minimal formal debt.
Other debt equivalents, such as reserves for plant decommissioning and
restructuring, are discussed in the section on advanced issues.

Equity (E) Equity includes original investor funds, such as common stock
and additional paid-in capital, as well as investor funds reinvested into the
company such as retained earnings and accumulated other comprehensive
income (AOCI). In the United States, AOCI consists primarily of currency
adjustments and aggregate unrealized gains and losses from liquid assets
whose value has changed but have not yet been sold. Any stock repurchased
and held in the treasury should be deducted from total equity.
Equity equivalents such as deferred taxes In certain situations, companies will expense a future cost that has no corresponding cash outlay.
Since the expense is noncash, both an expense and an offsetting liability are
recognized. The most common noncash expenses are deferred taxes and reserves created for the purpose of income smoothing. Each of these liabilities
is an equity equivalent, not an operating liability, so it should not be subtracted from operating assets. These liabilities should remain on the right
side of the invested-capital equation.
The most common equity equivalent, deferred taxes, arises primarily
from tax incentives that governments provide to encourage investment.11 In
many countries, companies use straight-line depreciation to determine taxes
reported in their financial statements but can use accelerated depreciation
to compute actual taxes owed.12 Since the delay in taxes is temporary, a liability is recognized. For growing companies, the financial statements will
overstate the company’s actual tax burden. Thus, rather than using the taxes
reported on the income statement to compute NOPLAT, we recommend
using taxes actually paid. Using cash taxes, however, means no deferred tax
account needs to be recognized. Instead, adjust retained earnings to balance
the financial statements. This is why deferred taxes are considered an equity
equivalent.
11
In addition to deferred taxes arising from invest ment, deferred taxes also arise from nonoperating items, such as pensions. When this is the case, deferred taxes should be aggregated with
(or netted against) their corresponding nonoperating item. See the company’s footnotes for a
full breakdown of deferred taxes.
12
Although not every country allows reported taxes to differ from actual taxes, the practice is
becoming more prevalent.

176

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

NOPLAT: In Practice
To determine the after-tax income generated by invested capital, we calculate net operating profits less adjusted taxes (NOPLAT). NOPLAT represents total income generated from operations available to all investors. To
determine NOPLAT for Home Depot and Lowe’s, we turn to their respective income statements (see Exhibit 7.7) and convert the income statement
into NOPLAT (see Exhibit 7.8).

Net operating profit (NOP or EBITA) NOPLAT starts with earnings before interest, taxes, and amortization of goodwill (EBITA), which equals
revenue less operating expenses (e.g., cost of goods sold, selling costs, general and administrative costs, depreciation).
Nonoperating income, gains, and losses To remain consistent with the
calculation of invested capital, calculate NOPLAT without interest income,
gains, and losses from the corresponding assets that have been excluded.
Historical returns on excess cash and other nonoperating assets should be
calculated and evaluated separately.
Income adjustments for hidden assets In the section on invested capital,
we outlined certain assets not on the balance sheet: operating leases and
capitalized R&D. Corresponding adjustments must also be made to the income statement:

Exhibit 7.7 Home Depot and Lowe’s: Historical Income Statement
$ million

Home Depot

Lowe’s

2001

2002

2003

2001

2002

2003

Net sales
Cost of merchandise sold
Selling, general and administrative
Depreciation
Amortization
EBIT

53,553
(37,406)
(10,451)
(756)
(8)
4,932

58,247
(40,139)
(11,375)
(895)
(8)
5,830

64,816
(44,236)
(12,658)
(1,075)
(1)
6,846

22,111
(15,743)
(4,053)
(517)
0
1,798

26,491
(18,465)
(4,859)
(626)
0
2,541

30,838
(21,231)
(5,671)
(758)
0
3,178

Interest and investment income
Interest expense
Discontinued operations
Earnings before taxes

53
(28)
0
4,957

79
(37)
0
5,872

59
(62)
0
6,843

25
(199)
0
1,624

21
(203)
0
2,359

15
(195)
15
3,013

Income taxes
Net earnings

(1,913)
3,044

(2,208)
3,664

(2,539)
4,304

(601)
1,023

(888)
1,471

(1,136)
1,877

REORGANIZING THE ACCOUNTING STATEMENTS: IN PRACTICE

177

Exhibit 7.8 Home Depot and Lowe’s: NOPLAT Calculation
$ million
Home Depot

Lowe’s

2001

2002

2003

2001

2002

2003

Net sales
Cost of merchandise sold
Selling, general and administrative
Depreciation
Operating lease interest
Adjusted EBITA

53,553
(37,406)
(10,451)
(756)
288
5,228

58,247
(40,139)
(11,375)
(895)
260
6,098

64,816
(44,236)
(12,658)
(1,075)
276
7,123

22,111
(15,743)
(4,053)
(517)
106
1,904

26,491
(18,465)
(4,859)
(626)
106
2,647

30,838
(21,231)
(5,671)
(758)
114
3,292

Operating cash taxes
NOPLAT

(2,020)
3,208

(2,117)
3,981

(2,040)
5,083

(654)
1,250

(825)
1,822

(1,069)
2,223

Operating taxes
Reported taxes
Taxes on interest income
Tax shield on interest expense
Tax shield on lease interest expense
Operating taxes on EBITA

1,913
(20)
11
111
2,014

2,208
(30)
14
98
2,290

2,539
(23)
24
105
2,645

601
(9)
75
40
707

888
(8)
78
41
998

1,136
(6)
74
44
1,248

Decrease (increase) in deferred taxes
Operating cash taxes on EBITA

6
2,020

(173)
2,117

(605)
2,040

(53)
654

(173)
825

(179)
1,069

Reconciliation with net income
Net earnings
Increase in deferred taxes
Goodwill amortization
Adjusted net income

2001
3,044
(6)
8
3,046

2002
3,664
173
8
3,845

2003
4,304
605
1
4,910

2001
1,023
53
0
1,076

2002
1,471
173
0
1,644

2003
1,877
179
0
2,056

After-tax interest expense
After-tax lease interest expense
Loss (gain) from discontinued operations
Total income available to investors

17
177
0
3,240

23
162
0
4,030

38
170
0
5,119

123
66
0
1,265

125
65
0
1,835

121
71
(15)
2,232

After-tax interest income
NOPLAT

(33)
3,208

(49)
3,981

(36)
5,083

(15)
1,250

(13)
1,822

(9)
2,223

• Operating lease payments, which consist of interest and depreciation,
are expensed within EBITA. Since interest is a financing flow, add back
the implied interest expense to determine EBITA and NOPLAT.
• If you decide to capitalize R&D, the R&D expense must not be
deducted from revenue to calculate operating profit. Instead, deduct
amortization of past R&D, using a reasonable amortization schedule.
Operating leases and capitalized R&D are detailed in the section on advanced issues later in this chapter. Pension expenses and loss provisions
may require further adjustments to income. The section on advanced issues
also discusses these topics.

178

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Operating cash taxes on EBITA Since nonoperating items also affect reported taxes, they must be adjusted to an all-equity, operating level. Since
interest expense is deductible before taxes, highly leveraged companies will
have smaller tax burdens. Although a smaller tax burden can lead to a
higher valuation, we recommend valuing all financing effects in the
weighted average cost of capital (WACC) or valuing them separately using
adjusted present value (APV)—but not as part of after-tax operating income.
For Home Depot, compute operating taxes for core operations by starting with reported taxes ($2,539). Next, eliminate the taxes paid on the nonoperating income generated by the company’s nonoperating assets ($23).
Finally, eliminate the interest expense tax shield (from both traditional debt
and capitalized operating leases) by adding the incremental taxes the companies would have paid had Home Depot been entirely financed with equity
($24 and $105 respectively). Home Depot’s calculation is as follows:
$ Millions

2001

2002

2003

Reported taxes
Subtract: Taxes on interest income
Add: Tax shield on interest expense
Add: Tax shield on operating lease
interest expense

1,913
(20)
11

2,208
(30)
14

2,539
(23)
24

111

98

105

Operating taxes

2,014

2,290

2,645

To eliminate the tax effects of each nonoperating item, multiply each line
item’s dollar amount by the company’s marginal tax rate. The marginal tax rate
is defined as the tax rate on an extra dollar of income.13 To calculate marginal
taxes, it is necessary to examine the company’s financial footnotes. Home
Depot reports the following tax schedule in footnote 3 of its annual report:

13

Tax Rate

2001

2002

2003

Income taxes at federal statutory rate (1)
State income taxes, net of federal (2)
Foreign rate differences
Other, net

35.0%
3.5
0.1
0.0

35.0%
2.7
0.0
0.0

35.0%
3.2
−0.4
−0.6

Accountant ’s effective (average) tax rate

38.6%

37.6%

37.1%

Marginal tax rate (1 + 2)

38.5%

37.7%

38.2%

Marginal taxes do not equal average taxes, which are computed by dividing reported taxes by
earnings before taxes. In fact, whereas marginal taxes are relatively constant, average taxes can
vary dramatically. Walt Disney’s average tax rate varied between 35 percent and 82 percent
from 2001 to 2003, whereas its marginal tax rate varied between 37 percent and 42 percent.

REORGANIZING THE ACCOUNTING STATEMENTS: IN PRACTICE

179

For adjusting reported taxes, marginal taxes are those taxes the company would pay if the financing or nonoperating item were eliminated. If
the company eliminated leverage, it would be required to pay additional
federal income taxes (line item 1) and state taxes (2). If foreign taxes (3) are
based on income and debt is raised abroad, they are marginal. If, however,
foreign taxes are based on revenues or debt is raised solely at home, they are
not marginal; taxes would not increase as leverage decreased. Whether
other taxes (4) are marginal requires further investigation. In this case, we
assume they are not. For Home Depot, the marginal tax rate is merely the
sum of the federal and state income taxes (1 + 2).
Finally, we recommend using the cash taxes actually paid, versus the
taxes reported.14 The simplest way to calculate cash taxes is to subtract the
increase in deferred tax liabilities from operating taxes on EBITA. As shown
in Exhibit 7.1, Home Depot’s deferred tax liabilities have been growing over
time, so reported taxes overstate actual cash taxes. Subtracting the increase
in deferred taxes leads to cash taxes:
$ Millions

2001

2002

2003

EBITA

5,228

6,098

7,123

(All-equity) operating taxes on EBITA
Decrease (increase) in deferred taxes

2,014
6

2,290
(173)

2,645
(605)

Operating cash taxes on EBITA

2,020

2,117

2,040

Operating tax rate
× (1 − percent deferred)

38.5%
−0.3%

37.6%
7.6%

37.1%
22.9%

Operating cash tax rate

38.6%

34.7%

28.6%

The cash tax rate at Home Depot has been falling because a greater percentage of operating taxes have been deferred. In 2003, Home Depot was able
to defer 22.9 percent of its operating taxes on EBITA.

Reconciliation to net income To ensure that the reorganization is complete, we recommend reconciling net income to NOPLAT (see the bottom of
Exhibit 7.8). To reconcile NOPLAT, start with net income and add back the
increase in deferred tax liabilities and goodwill amortization. Next, add
back after-tax interest expense from both debt and capitalized operating
leases. This determines the profits available to all investors. To calculate
NOPLAT, subtract after-tax gains and income from nonoperating assets,
and you are done. We do this for Home Depot in Exhibit 7.8.
14
If a company reported cash taxes on the income statement, the deferred tax liability would no
longer exist, and an offsetting adjust ment to retained earnings would be made. Thus, when
using cash taxes, you should treat the deferred tax liability as an equity equivalent.

180

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Free Cash Flow: In Practice
Free cash flow is defined as:
FCF = NOPLAT + Noncash Operating Expenses − Investments in Invested Capital

Exhibit 7.9 builds the free cash flow calculation and reconciles free cash
flow to cash flow available to investors for both Home Depot and Lowe’s.
The components of free cash flow are as follows:

Gross cash flow Gross cash flow represents the cash flow generated by
the company’s operations. It represents the cash available for investment
and investor payout, without having to sell nonoperating assets (e.g., excess
cash) or raise additional capital. Gross cash flow has two components:
1. NOPLAT: As previously defined, net operating profits after taxes are
the operating profits available to all investors.
2. Noncash operating expenses: Some expenses deducted from revenue to
generate NOPLAT are noncash expenses. To convert NOPLAT into
cash flow, add back noncash expenses. The two most common noncash expenses are depreciation and employee stock options.15 Do not
add back goodwill amortization and impairments to NOPLAT; they
were not subtracted in calculating NOPLAT.

Gross investment To grow, companies must reinvest a portion of their
gross cash flow back into the business. To determine free cash flow, subtract gross investment from gross cash flow. We segment gross investment
into four primary areas:
1. Change in operating working capital: Growing a business requires investment in operating cash, inventory, and other components of
working capital. Operating working capital excludes nonoperating
assets, such as excess cash, and financing items, such as short-term
debt and dividends payable.
2. Net capital expenditures: Net capital expenditures equals investments
in property, plant, and equipment, less the book value of any PPE

15

Even though stock options are a noncash expense, they represent value being transferred
from shareholders to company employees. Therefore, if you choose to add back noncash compensation to NOPLAT, you must value noncash compensation separately. If you choose not to
add back noncash compensation to NOPLAT, there is no need to value them separately. They
will be part of enterprise value.

REORGANIZING THE ACCOUNTING STATEMENTS: IN PRACTICE

181

Exhibit 7.9 Home Depot and Lowe’s: Historical Free Cash Flow
$ million
Home Depot

Lowe’s

2001
3,208
756
3,964

2002
3,981
895
4,876

2003
5,083
1,075
6,157

2001
1,250
517
1,767

2002
1,822
626
2,448

2003
2,223
758
2,981

Investment in operating working capital
834
Net capital expenditures
(3,063)
Investment in capitalized operating leases
(775)
Investments in intangibles and goodwill
(113)
Increase (decrease) in other operating assets
105
Increase (decrease) in accumulated other
(153)
comprehensive income
Gross investment
(3,165)

(194)
(2,688)
(430)
(164)
31
138

72
(3,970)
(664)
(259)
277
172

(203)
(2,135)
(547)
0
(7)
3

183
(2,325)
(184)
0
(11)
0

88
(2,351)
(389)
0
(66)
0

(3,307)

(4,372)

(2,889)

(2,336)

(2,719)

Free cash flow

799

1,569

1,785

1,122

112

262

After-tax interest income
Decrease (increase) in excess cash
Decrease (increase) in nonoperating assets
Discontinued operations

33
(1,509)
9
0

49
383
(24)
0

36
(473)
23
0

15
(321)
13
0

13
(189)
(7)
0

9
(415)
(140)
15

Cash flow available to investors

(668)

1,977

1,371

(1,415)

(71)

(268)

2001
17
177
88
(775)

2002
23
162
140
(430)

2003
38
170
(44)
(664)

2001
123
66
(903)
(547)

2002
125
65
78
(184)

2003
121
71
60
(389)

(492)

(105)

(500)

(1,261)

85

(138)

Dividends
Net shares repurchased (issued)
Flows to equity holders

396
(572)
(176)

492
1,590
2,082

595
1,276
1,871

60
(213)
(154)

66
(222)
(156)

87
(217)
(130)

Cash flow available to investors

(668)

1,977

1,371

(1,415)

(71)

(268)

NOPLAT
Depreciation
Gross cash flow

After-tax interest expense
After-tax lease interest expense
Decrease (increase) in debt
Decrease (increase) in capitalized
operating leases
Flows to debt holders

sold. Net capital expenditures are estimated by taking the change in
net property, plant, and equipment plus depreciation. Do not estimate capital expenditures by taking the change in gross PP&E. Since
gross PP&E drops when companies retire assets (which has no cash
implications), the change in gross PP&E will often understate the actual amount of capital expenditures.

182

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

3. Change in capitalized operating leases: To keep the definitions of
NOPLAT, invested capital, and free cash flow consistent, include investments in capitalized operating leases in gross investment.16
4. Investment in acquired intangibles and goodwill: For acquired intangible
assets, where cumulative amortization has been added back, we can
estimate investment by computing the change in net acquired intangibles. For intangible assets that are being amortized, use the same
method as determining net capital expenditures ( by taking the
change in net intangibles plus amortization).
5.

Change in other long-term operating assets, net of long-term liabilities: Subtract investments in other net operating assets. As with invested capital, do not confuse other long-term operating assets with other
long-term nonoperating assets, such as equity investments and excess pension assets. Changes in equity investments need to be evaluated—but should be measured separately.

Since companies translate foreign balance sheets into their home currency, changes in accounts will capture both true investments (which involve cash) and currency-based restatements (which are merely accounting
adjustments). Removing the currency effects line item by line item is impossible. But we can partially undo their effect by subtracting the increase
in the equity item titled “foreign currency translation effect,” which in the
United States is found within the accumulated other comprehensive income
account (AOCI).17 By subtracting the increase, we undo the effect of changing exchange rates.18
Reinvestment ratio Once gross cash flow and gross investment are calculated, we can compare them by dividing gross investment by gross cash
flow. The faster the company is growing, the higher the ratio will be. If the
ratio is rising without a corresponding increase in growth, examine
16

Since capitalized operating leases are an artificial computation to allow for comparison
across companies, we are modeling cash f lows that do not really occur. Therefore, some analysts model capitalized operating leases only for ROIC and not for free cash f low. To calculate
FCF independent of capitalized operating leases, do not add back after-tax interest when calculating NOPLAT, do not take the change in capitalized operating leases when calculating gross
invest ment, and do not subtract their present value when valuing the company.
17
Another source of AOCI equals unrealized gains and losses from marketable securities. Each
period, marketable securities are marked to market, even if the gains and losses are unrealized.
Thus, a change in marketable securities might not represent a nonoperating cash f low, but
rather an adjust ment to their market value. Combining unrealized gains and losses in AOCI
with changes in marketable securities will give a more accurate picture of marketable security
purchases and sales (which are located in the nonoperating section of cash f low to investors).
18
For more information on currency adjust ments, see FASB Statement 52.

REORGANIZING THE ACCOUNTING STATEMENTS: IN PRACTICE

183

whether the company’s investments are taking longer to blossom than expected, or whether the company is adding capital inefficiently.

Cash flow available to investors Although not included in free cash flow,
cash flows related to nonoperating assets are valuable in their own right
and must be evaluated separately:
Present Value
Present Value of After-Tax Total Value
of Company's + Nonoperating Cash Flow =
of
Enterprise
Free Cash Flow
and Marketable Securities

To reconcile free cash flow with total cash flow available to investors,
include the following nonoperating cash flows:
• Cash f low related to excess cash and marketable securities: Excess cash and
marketable securities generate cash flow through interest income
and asset sales. When you add investment income to cash flow, it
must be added-back on an after-tax basis, using the marginal tax rate.
This is necessary because NOPLAT includes taxes only on operating
profit, not total earnings.
• Cash f low from other nonoperating assets: Similar to the treatment of
excess cash, add other nonoperating income and gains (or subtract
losses) less increases in other nonoperating assets (or add decreases). It is best to combine nonoperating income and changes in
nonoperating assets; otherwise a distorted picture could emerge.
Consider a company that impaired a $100 million equity investment. If we examine the change in equity investments alone, it appears that the company sold $100 million in nonoperating assets.
But this assessment is misleading because no cash actually changed
hands; the asset was merely marked down. If we combine the $100
million change (positive cash flow) with the $100 million reported
loss (negative cash flow) from the income statement, we see the true
impact is zero.

Total financing flow Cash flow available to investors should be identical
to total financing flow. That is, it flows to or from all investors. By modeling
cash flow to and from investors, you will catch mistakes otherwise missed.
Financial flows include flows related to debt, debt equivalents, and equity:
• After-tax interest expenses: After-tax interest should be treated as a financing flow. When computing after-tax interest, use the same marginal tax rate used for NOPLAT.

184

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

• Debt issues and repurchases: The change in debt represents the net
borrowing or repayment on all the company’s interest-bearing debt,
including short-term debt, long-term debt, and capitalized operating leases.
• Dividends: Dividends include all cash dividends on common and preferred shares. Dividends paid in stock have no cash effects and
should be ignored.
• Share issues and repurchases: When new equity is issued or shares are
repurchased, three accounts will be affected: common stock, additional paid-in capital, and treasury shares. Although different transactions will have varying affects on the individual accounts, we focus
on the aggregate change of the three accounts combined. In Exhibit
7.9, we refer to the aggregate change as “Net Shares Repurchased.”
• Change in debt and equity equivalents: Since accrued pension liabilities
and accrued postretirement medical benefits are considered debt
equivalents (see advanced topics for more on issues related to retirement benefits), their changes should be treated as a financing flow.
Although deferred taxes are treated as an equity equivalent, they
should not be included in the financing flow because they are already included as part of NOPLAT.
With our financial statements now reorganized to reflect economic performance versus accounting performance, we are ready to analyze a company’s return on invested capital, operating margins, and capital efficiency.

ANALYZING RETURNS ON INVESTED CAPITAL
Having reorganized the financial statements, we have a clean measure of
total invested capital and its related after-tax operating income. Return on
invested capital (ROIC) measures the ratio of NOPLAT to invested capital:
ROIC =

NOPLAT
Invested Capital

If an asset is included in invested capital, the income related to that
asset should be in NOPLAT. Similarly, if a liability is netted against operating assets to determine invested capital, its related expense should be deducted from revenue to determine NOPLAT. Defining the numerator and
denominator consistently in this manner is the most important part of correctly calculating the ROIC.
Since profit is measured over an entire year (whereas capital is measured only at a point in time), we also recommend that you average starting

ANALYZING RETURNS ON INVESTED CAPITAL

185

Exhibit 7.10 Home Depot and Lowe’s: Return on Invested Capital
percent
18.2
16.0
14.3

13.9

12.8
10.3

Home Depot
Lowe’s

2001

2002

2003

Note: ROIC based on average invested capital.

and ending invested capital. Companies that report ROIC in their annual
reports often use starting capital. If new assets acquired during the year
generate additional income, using only starting capital will overestimate
the true ROIC.
Using the NOPLAT and invested capital figures calculated for Home
Depot and Lowe’s in Exhibits 7.5 and 7.8, we measure the return on invested capital for each company. As can be seen in Exhibit 7.10, Home
Depot’s ROIC in 2003 exceeds Lowe’s ROIC by about 4 percentage points.
Both companies have improved their respective ROIC from 2001 to 2003.
Since it focuses solely on a company’s operations, ROIC is a better analytical tool for understanding the company’s performance than return
on equity (ROE) and return on assets (ROA). Return on equity mixes operating performance with capital structure, making peer group analysis
and trend analysis less meaningful. Return on assets (even when calculated on a preinterest basis) is inadequate because the ratio double counts
any implicit financing charged by suppliers—in the numerator as part of
cost of goods sold (COGS) and in the denominator as part of total assets.

Analyzing Return on Invested Capital with and without Goodwill
ROIC should be computed both with and without goodwill because each
ratio analyzes different things. For instance, a company that purchases another at a premium to book must spend real resources to acquire valuable
economic assets. If the company does not properly compensate investors for
the funds spent (or shares given away), it will destroy value. Thus, when
you measure historical performance for the company’s shareholders, ROIC
should be measured with goodwill.

186

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Conversely, ROIC excluding goodwill measures the company’s internal
performance and is useful for comparing operating performance across
companies and for analyzing trends. It is not distorted by the price premiums paid for acquisitions made to build the company.
For both Home Depot and Lowe’s, goodwill is a relatively small part of
invested capital, but for companies that rely on acquisitions, the choice can
make a big difference. In 2003, Procter & Gamble continued its string of acquisitions by purchasing Wella, the German hair-care products company.
As a result of this and other acquisitions, P&G had $13.5 billion in cumulative goodwill and $13.8 billion of organic invested capital. As can be seen in
the following table, the inclusion of goodwill reduces Procter & Gamble’s
ROIC by nearly half:

ROIC excluding goodwill (%)
ROIC including goodwill (%)

2000

2001

2002

2003

26.3
17.8

24.8
16.5

33.2
19.6

41.2
21.3

Economic Profit
In Chapter 5, we demonstrated that the value of a company’s operations
equals the book value of its invested capital plus the discounted present
value of economic profits. Economic profits are calculated as follows:
Economic Profit = Invested Capital × (ROIC − WACC)

For an alternative definition of economic profit, substitute NOPLAT/Invested capital for ROIC, and cancel terms:
Economic Profit = NOPLAT − (Invested Capital × WACC)

Because it measures whether a company is using its capital more effectively than could be done in the capital markets, economic profit is a powerful tool. In 2003, Home Depot generated $5.1 billion in NOPLAT, yet its
capital charge was only $2.4 billion. As can be seen in Exhibit 7.11, both
Home Depot and Lowe’s were creating value.
Profitable companies do not always create value. In fact, if the capital
charge (defined as WACC times invested capital) exceeds NOPLAT, then
the company is actually destroying value.
Do not confuse economic profit, which measures how profitably the
company used its capital versus the capital markets, with a company’s
change in market value. In fiscal year 2003, Home Depot generated $2.6 billion in economic profit. During the same year, the company paid $595 mil-

ANALYZING RETURNS ON INVESTED CAPITAL

187

Exhibit 7.11 Home Depot and Lowe’s: Economic Profit Calculation
$ million
Home Depot

Lowe’s

Invested capital1
Weighted average cost of capital
Capital charge

2001
21,379
10.1%
2,159

2002
23,635
9.0%
2,124

2003
26,185
9.3%
2,438

2001
10,965
9.8%
1,071

2002
13,341
8.8%
1,175

2003
15,051
9.1%
1,373

NOPLAT
Capital charge
Economic profit

3,208
(2,159)
1,048

3,981
(2,124)
1,857

5,083
(2,438)
2,645

1,250
(1,071)
179

1,822
(1,175)
647

2,223
(1,373)
850

1

Invested capital is measured at the beginning of the year.

lion in dividends, and its stock appreciated by $26.4 billion. This generated
a total return to shareholders (TRS) of $27.0 billion, substantially more
than the economic profit. Economic profit and total returns to shareholders
measure different aspects of value: Economic profit measures the one-year
performance on historical book capital. The change in market value measures
changing expectations about future economic profits. In Home Depot’s case,
the market raised its expectations of the company’s future performance,
based on recent improvements in profitability.

Decomposing Return on Invested Capital to Build an
Integrated Perspective
Compared with both its weighted average cost of capital and that of its
archrival Lowe’s, Home Depot has been earning a superior return on invested capital. But what is driving this performance? Can it be sustained?
To better understand ROIC, split apart the ratio as follows:
ROIC = (1 − Cash Tax Rate ) ×

EBITA
Revenues
×
Revenues Invested Capital

The preceding equation is one of the most powerful equations in financial
analysis. It demonstrates that a company’s ROIC is driven by its ability to
maximize profitability (operating margin), optimize capital efficiency
(turns), or minimize taxes.
Each of these components can be further disaggregated into their respective components, so that each expense and capital item can be compared with revenues. Exhibit 7.12 on page 188 shows how the components
can be organized into a tree. On the right side of the tree are operational

188

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 7.12 Home Depot and Lowe’s: Return on Invested Capital, 2003
percent
Gross
margin

Operating
margin
Home Depot

Pre-tax
ROIC

11.0
10.7

19.1
18.0

20.5

18.2

Depreciation/
revenues

13.9
Cash tax
rate

31.2

25.5

ROIC

Lowe’s

SG&A/
revenues1

31.8

1.7
2.5

28.6
32.5
Average
capital
turns

2.3
1.9

Operating 4.2
working
capital/ 4.6
revenues

Fixed
assets/
revenues

38.9
47.4

1

Interest expense from operating leases has been removed from SG&A.

drivers, over which the manager has control. As we read from right to left,
each subsequent box is a function of the boxes to its right. For example,
pretax ROIC equals operating margin times capital turnover, and operating margin equals gross margin less SG&A/revenues less depreciation/
revenues.
Once you have calculated the historical value drivers, compare them
with the drivers of other companies in the same industry. Integrate this perspective with an analysis of the industry structure (opportunities for differentiation, entry/exit barriers, etc.) and a qualitative assessment of the
company’s strengths and weaknesses.
What is the source of Home Depot’s ROIC advantage over Lowe’s? Is
the advantage sustainable? By examining the ROIC tree in Exhibit 7.12, we
can see that Home Depot benefits from a more efficient use of capital and a
better cash tax rate. Moving to the right, we see that this capital efficiency
comes primarily from fixed assets, which in turn come from more revenues
per dollar of store investment. Is this because Home Depot’s stores are
more efficient or operating at higher-traffic locations? Perhaps, but after
further investigation, it appears that a typical Lowe’s store is newer and

ANALYZING RETURNS ON INVESTED CAPITAL

189

Exhibit 7.13 Home Depot and Lowe’s: Operating Current Assets in Days
Number of days
Home Depot

Operating cash
Receivables, net
Merchandise inventories
Other current assets
Operating current assets

Lowe’s

2001

2002

2003

2001

2002

2003

7.0
6.3
45.8
1.2
60.3

7.0
6.7
52.2
1.6
67.6

7.0
6.2
51.1
1.7
66.0

7.0
2.7
59.6
4.8
74.1

7.0
2.4
54.7
4.2
68.2

7.0
1.6
54.3
4.1
66.9

thus more expensive than Home Depot’s average store.19 Newer stores may
be a burden today (from a turns perspective) but could be an advantage
going forward.

Line item analysis A comprehensive valuation model will convert every
line item in the company’s financial statements into some type of ratio. For
the income statement, most items are taken as a percentage of sales. (Exceptions exist, however: Taxes should be calculated as a percentage of pretax
profits, to determine an average tax rate, not as a percentage of sales.)
For the balance sheet, each line item can also be taken as a percentage of
revenues (or for inventories and payables, to avoid the bias caused by changing prices, as a percentage of cost of goods sold). For operating current assets and liabilities, you can also convert each line item into “days,” using
the following formula:
Days = 365 ×

Balance Sheet Item
Revenues

Although days and a percentage of sales perform a similar crosscompany and trend analysis, the use of days lends itself to a more operational interpretation.20 As can be seen in Exhibit 7.13, the average inventory
holding time (using revenue as a base) for Home Depot has risen from 46 to
51 days, whereas the inventory holding time for Lowe’s has dropped from
60 to 54. The use of days shows us that what used to be a sizable advantage
for Home Depot has turned into a virtual dead heat.
19
M. E. Lloyd, “Lowe’s Execs: Younger Stores, New Programs Distinguish Company,” Dow
Jones Newswires (May 28, 2004).
20
If the business is seasonal, operating ratios such as inventories should be calculated using
quarterly data.

190

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 7.14 Discount Carrier and Network Carrier: Operating Statistics
Discount carrier
2003

Network carrier
2003

Total revenues ($ millions)
Labor expenses ($ millions)

1,000.0
252.4

10,000.0
4,767.3

Number of employees
Available seat miles (millions)

5,773.2
10,942.9

53,070.7
101,017.1

Operating statistic

Source: Company 10-Ks.

Nonfinancial analysis In an external analysis, ratios are often confined to
financial performance. If you are working from inside a company, however,
or if the company releases operating data, link operating drivers directly to
return on invested capital. By evaluating the operating drivers, you can better assess the sustainability of financial spreads among competitors.
Consider airlines, which are required to release a tremendous amount
of operating data. Exhibit 7.14 details operating data from two airlines, a
point-to-point discount carrier and a full-service network carrier. The exhibit includes the first two line items from each airline’s income statement,
total revenue and labor expenses, as well as two operating statistics, total
employees and available seat miles (ASMs).21
Dividing labor expenses by total revenue (as part of ROIC) shows that
the network carrier’s labor costs (47.7 percent of revenues) are nearly twice
as high as the discount carrier’s labor costs (25.2 percent of revenues). But
what is driving this differential? Are the discounter’s employees more productive? Or are they paid less? Is it that the discount carrier can charge a
price premium for its product? To answer these questions, we disaggregated labor expenses to revenue, using the following equation:
Labor Expenses
Revenues

=

Labor Expenses
Total Employees

×

Total Employees
ASMs Flown

×

ASMs F lown
Revenues

Note how each term’s denominator cancels the next term’s numerator,
leaving us with the original ratio. Each term has a specific operating interpretation. The first term represents the average salary per full-time employee; the second measures the productivity of each full-time employee
(number of employees required to fly one billion ASMs); and the third measures the number of miles flown to generate one dollar of revenue. Companies that can charge a price premium (for such services as frequent-flier
miles) need to fly fewer miles per dollar of revenue.
21
Airlines use available seat miles as a proxy for unit capacity. Available seat miles equal the
total number of seats available for passengers times the number of miles the airline f lies.

ANALYZING REVENUE GROWTH

191

Exhibit 7.15 Operational Drivers of Labor Expenses to Revenues
2003
Average labor cost
per employee

$43,722
$89,830

Employees per billion
available seat miles

527.6
525.4
Discount carrier
Network carrier

Available seat miles
flown per dollar
revenue

10.9
10.1

Exhibit 7.15 illustrates the comparative drivers of total labor expenses
for both airlines. Note that the numbers of employees required to fly one
billion ASMs are nearly identical (528 employees for the discount carrier
versus 525 for the network carrier). The numbers of miles flown to generate
one dollar of revenue are also comparable (10.9 miles for the discount carrier
and 10.1 for the network carrier). What really drives the difference is average salaries.22 Based on the calculation, the discounter’s employees earn
half the salary ($43,722) of their counterparts at the network carrier
($89,830). To assess the network carrier’s ability to survive and prosper, we
must ask whether the company can close this gap. If it cannot, financial performance will remain poor, and its outlook remains bleak.

ANALYZING REVENUE GROWTH
In Chapter 3 we determined that the value of a company is driven by ROIC,
WACC, and growth. Until now, growth has been defined solely as the
growth in cash flows. But what drives the long-term growth in cash flows?
Assuming profit margins and reinvestment rates stabilize to a long-term
level, long-term growth in cash flows will be directly tied to long-term
growth in revenues. And by analyzing historical revenue growth, we can
assess the potential for growth going forward.
22

Since the number of employees is reported only once a year, labor costs per employee are only
a proxy for average salary. Also, labor costs per employee might differ across airlines because of
differences in mix. Both airlines might pay identical salaries for the same position, but the network carrier might employ more higher-paid positions.

192

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 7.16 IBM: Revenue Growth Analysis
percent

Organic revenue growth
Acquisitions
Divestitures
Currency effects
Reported revenue growth

2001

2002

2003

0.5
0.5
0.0
(3.9)
(2.9)

(1.8)
2.1
(3.3)
(2.5)
(5.5)

(2.6)
5.4
0.0
7.0
9.8

Calculating revenue growth directly from the income statement will
suffice for most companies. The year-to-year revenue growth results
sometimes can be misleading, however. The three prime culprits affecting
revenue growth are the effects of changes in currency values for multinational companies, mergers and acquisitions, and changes in accounting
policies.
Exhibit 7.16 demonstrates how misleading raw year-to-year revenue
growth figures can be. In 2003, when IBM announced its first rise in reported revenues in three years, it became the subject of a Fortune magazine
cover story.23 “Things appear to be straightening out dramatically,” reported Fortune. “Last year Palmisano’s company grew for the first time
since 2000, posting a 10 percent revenue jump.” Although IBM’s revenues
had technically risen 9.8 percent, organic revenues (those attributable to the
company’s core business, independent of currency fluctuations, acquisitions and divestitures, and accounting changes) actually fell 2.6 percent. Indeed, the rise in IBM’s revenue was directly attributable to the general
weakening of the U.S. dollar and its acquisitions of Rational Software and of
PricewaterhouseCooper’s (PwCC) consulting business.

Currency Effects
Multinational companies conduct business in many currencies. At the end
of each reporting period, these revenues are converted to the currency of
the reporting company. If foreign currencies are rising in value relative to
the company’s home currency, this translation, at better rates, will lead to
higher revenue numbers. Thus, a rise in revenue may not reflect increased
pricing power or greater quantities sold, but just a depreciation of the company’s home currency.
23
D. Kirkpatrick and C. Tkaczyk, “Inside Sam’s $100 Billion Growth Machine,” Fortune ( June 14,
2004), p. 80.

ANALYZING REVENUE GROWTH

193

Companies with extensive foreign business will often comment about
revenue growth, using current as well as constant exchange rates. IBM discloses a “year-to-year revenue change” of 9.8 percent but a “year-to-year
constant currency” revenue change of only 2.8 percent. Thus, had currencies remained at their prior-year levels, IBM revenue would have been $83.5
billion, rather than the $89.1 billion reported.

Mergers and Acquisitions
Growth through acquisition may have very different ROIC characteristics
from internal growth because of the sizable premiums a company must pay
to acquire another company. Therefore, it is important to understand how
companies have been generating historical revenue growth—through acquisition or internally.
Stripping the effect of acquisitions from reported revenues is difficult.
Unless an acquisition is material, company filings do not need to detail or
even report an acquisition. For larger acquisitions, a company will sometimes report pro forma statements that recast historical financials as
though the acquisition was completed at the beginning of the fiscal year.
Revenue growth, then, should be calculated using the pro forma revenue
numbers. If the target company publicly reports its own financial data, pro
forma statements can be constructed manually by combining revenue of the
acquirer and target for the prior year. But beware: The bidder will often include only partial-year revenues from the target for the period after the acquisition is completed. To remain consistent, reconstructed prior years also
must include only partial-year revenue.
In its 2003 annual report, IBM did not create historical pro forma revenues to account for its February 2003 acquisition of Rational Software. To
properly analyze IBM’s 2003 organic growth rate, therefore, we create our
own estimated historical pro formas (see Exhibit 7.17, p. 194). Since the acquisition closed at the end of February, IBM’s 2003 revenue included 10
months of Rational Software’s revenues, whereas IBM’s 2002 revenues did
not. To make the two years comparable, add 10 months of Rational Software’s historical revenues to IBM’s.
In October 2002, IBM acquired PwCC. IBM’s 2003 revenue included an
entire year of PwCC revenue, whereas 2002 included only three months of
PwCC. To make the two years comparable, add nine months of PwCC’s 2002
revenues to IBM’s 2002 revenues.24 Combining IBM’s reported revenue with
its partial-year revenue from the two acquisitions results in a 2002 pro
forma revenue of $85.7 billion. Comparing 2003’s constant-currency revenue
24
We assume PwCC was purchased in its entirety by IBM (since PwCC was a private company,
a full analysis is difficult). If only a portion of the business were purchased, our estimate of acquired growth would shrink.

194

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 7.17 IBM: Calculating Organic Revenue Growth
$ million

IBM reported 2002 revenue
Ten months of Rational Software revenue
Nine months of PwCC revenue
IBM adjusted 2002 revenue

Transaction
date

Estimated
2002
revenue

Partial
year
adjustment

2/21/2003
10/1/2002

689.8
5,200.0

10/12
9/12

IBM 2003 “constant currency” revenue
IBM adjusted growth rate

Revenue
adjustments
81,186.0
574.8
3,900.0
85,660.8
83,459.2
(2.6%)

Source: Hoovers On-Line (for Rational Software) and Gartner Group (for PwCC).

of $83.5 billion with the pro forma prior-year revenues of $85.7 billion
shows a decline in organic revenues of 2.6 percent.

Accounting Changes and Irregularities
Each year, the Financial Accounting Standards Board in the United States
and the International Accounting Standards Board make recommendations
concerning the financial treatment of certain business transactions. Most
changes in revenue recognition policies do not come as formal pronouncements from the boards themselves, but from task forces that issue topic
notes. Companies then have a set amount of time to implement the required
changes. Changes in a company’s revenue recognition policy can significantly affect revenues from year to year.
Consider Emerging Issues Task Force (EITF) 01-14 from the Financial
Accounting Standards Board, which concerns reimbursable expenses. Before 2002, U.S. companies accounted for reimbursable expenses by ignoring
the pass-through. Today, U.S. companies can recognize the reimbursement
as revenue and the outlay as an expense. Although operating profits were
unaffected, this dramatically increased year-by-year revenue comparisons
for some companies from 2001 to 2002.25
If an accounting change is material, a company will document the
change in its section on management discussion and analysis (MD&A) and
will also recast its historical financial statements. Some companies do not
fully document changes in accounting policy, and this can lead to distorted
views of performance. For example, a change in consolidation policy can in25
One such company, Total System Services (TSYS), a credit-card-processing company, changed
its recognition of reimbursable expenses in 2002. From 2001 to 2002, the company increased revenues from $650 million to $955 million, but $250 million of the $305 million in new revenues
was attributable solely to the accounting change. Since the change was material, TSYS recast its
previous year’s financial statements and discussed the change in its management discussion
and analysis.

ANALYZING REVENUE GROWTH

195

flate revenue growth artificially. In the extreme case, a company that consolidates equity investments one by one can generate artificial revenue
growth for years.

Decomposing Revenue Growth to Build an Integrated Perspective
Once the effects of mergers and acquisitions, currency translations, and accounting changes have been removed from the year-to-year revenue growth
numbers, analyze revenue growth from an operational perspective. The
most standard breakdown is:
Revenues =

Revenue
× Units
Unit

Using this formula, determine whether prices or quantities are driving
growth. Do not, however, confuse revenue per unit with price—they can be
different. If revenue per unit is rising, the change could be due to rising
prices. Or the company could be shifting its product mix from low-priced to
high-priced items.
The operating statistics that companies choose to report (if any) depend
on the norms of the industry and the practices of competitors. For instance,
most retailers provide information on the number of stores they operate,
the number of square feet in those stores, and the number of transactions
they conduct annually. By relating different operating statistics to total revenues, we can build a deeper understanding of the business. Consider this
retailing standard:
Revenues =

Revenue
× Stores
Stores

Using the operating statistics reported in Exhibit 7.18, we discover Home
Depot not only has more stores than Lowe’s, but also generates more revenue

Exhibit 7.18 Home Depot and Lowe’s: Operating Data
Home Depot
Operating data
Revenue ($ millions)
Number of stores
Number of transactions (millions)
Square feet (thousands)

Lowe’s

2001

2002

2003

2001

2002

2003

53,553
1,333
1,091
116,901

58,247
1,532
1,161
157,335

64,816
1,707
1,246
182,649

22,111
744
402
80,700

26,491
854
466
94,794

30,838
952
521
108,528

Source: Company 10-Ks; missing figures estimated using alternative 10-K data.

196

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 7.19 Home Depot and Lowe’s: Revenue Growth Analysis, 2003
percent

Number of
transactions
per store
Home Depot

Revenue
per store

Dollars per
transaction

16.4
Lowe’s

0.2

4.4

Revenue

4.2
2.7

(3.7)

(0.1)

11.3

Number
of stores

Square
feet per
store

3.7

Number of
(7.6)
transactions
per square
(2.5)
foot

4.2

11.4
11.5

per store ($38 million per store for Home Depot versus $32.4 million for
Lowe’s). Using the three operating statistics, we can build ratios on revenues per store, transactions per store, square feet per store, dollars per
transaction, and number of transactions per square foot.
Although operating ratios are powerful in their own right, what can really change one’s thinking about performance is how the ratios are changing over time. Exhibit 7.19 organizes each ratio into a tree similar to the
ROIC tree built earlier. Rather than report a calculated ratio, such as revenues per store, however, we report the change in the ratio and relate this
back to the growth in revenue. At Home Depot and Lowe’s, revenues are
growing at rates above 10 percent. That growth is respectable by any standard. For Home Depot, however, new store openings, rather than an increase in revenues per store, have been driving growth.
The implications of this analysis are extremely important, to the point
that financial analysts have a special name for growth in revenue per store:
comps, shorthand for “comparables,” or year-to-year same-store sales.26 Why
is this revenue growth important? First, new store development is an investment choice, whereas same-store sales growth reflects store-by-store operating performance. Second, new stores require large capital investments,
whereas comps growth requires little incremental capital. Higher revenues
and less capital lead to higher capital turns, which lead to higher ROIC.
26
Exhibit 7.19 reports only a proxy for comps, as it calculates revenue per store growth directly
from each company’s reported operating statistics. Given the statistic’s importance, both Home
Depot and Lowe’s report their own calculation of comps growth, defining it as same-store sales
for stores open at least one year. How the companies treat closed stores in calculating comps
growth is unclear. According to their annual reports, comps growth for Home Depot in 2003
was 3.8 percent, while comps growth for Lowe’s was 6.7 percent.

CREDIT HEALTH AND CAPITAL STRUCTURE

197

CREDIT HEALTH AND CAPITAL STRUCTURE
To this point, we have focused on the operations of the company and its
ability to create value. We have examined the primary drivers of value: a
company’s return on invested capital, organic revenue growth, and free
cash flow. In the final step of historical analysis, we focus on how the company has financed its operations. What proportion of invested capital
comes from creditors instead of from equity investors? Is this capital structure sustainable? Can the company survive an industry downturn?
To determine how aggressive a company’s capital structure is, we examine two related but distinct concepts, liquidity (via coverage) and leverage. Liquidity measures the company’s ability to meet short-term
obligations, such as interest expenses, rental payments, and required
principal payments. Leverage measures the company’s ability to meet obligations over the long term. Since this book’s focus is not credit analysis,
we detail only a few ratios that credit analysts use to evaluate a company’s
credit health.

Coverage
To measure the company’s ability to meet short-term obligations, compute
two ratios: the traditional interest coverage ratio and a more advanced measure, EBITDAR to interest expense plus rental expense.27 Interest coverage
is calculated by dividing either EBITA or EBITDA by interest. The first
ratio, EBITA to interest, measures the company’s ability to repay interest
using profits without having to cut expenditures intended to replace depreciating equipment. The second coverage ratio, EBITDA to interest, measures
the company’s ability to meet short-term financial commitments, using
both current profits and the depreciation dollars earmarked for replacement capital. Although EBITDA provides a good measure of extremely
short-term ability to meet interest payments, most companies cannot survive very long without replacing worn assets.
Like the interest coverage ratio, the ratio of EBITDAR to interest expense plus rental expense measures the company’s ability to meet its
known future obligations, including the effect of operating leases. For
many companies, especially retailers, including rental expenses is a critical part of understanding the financial health of the business. Assuming
Home Depot can maintain its current level of EBITDAR, it should have no
problems meeting either its interest or rental expense commitments (see
Exhibit 7.20 on p. 198).28
27
EBITDAR is a common acronym for earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, and rental expenses.
28
Profitable, stable companies with small amounts of debt have little bankruptcy risk but forgo
the tax benefits of debt. We discuss optimal capital structure in Chapter 17.

198

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 7.20 Home Depot: Measuring Coverage
$ million
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

EBITA
EBITDA
EBITDAR

3,803
4,258
4,647

4,199
4,792
5,271

4,940
5,696
6,218

5,838
6,733
7,266

6,847
7,922
8,492

Interest
Rental expense
Interest plus rental expense

28
389
417

21
479
500

28
522
550

37
533
570

62
570
632

EBITA / Interest
EBITDA / Interest
EBITDAR / Interest plus rental

135.8
152.1
11.1

199.9
228.2
10.5

176.4
203.4
11.3

157.8
182.0
12.7

110.4
127.8
13.4

Source: Home Depot 10-Ks.

Leverage
To better understand the power (and danger) of leverage, consider the relationship between return on equity (ROE) and return on invested capital (ROIC):
ROE = ROIC +  ROIC − (1 − T ) kd 

D
E

As the formula demonstrates, a company’s ROE is a direct function of its
ROIC, its spread of ROIC over its after-tax cost of debt, and its book-based
debt-to-equity ratio. Consider a company earning an ROIC of 10 percent,
whose after-tax cost of debt is 5 percent. To raise its ROE, the company can
either increase its ROIC (through operating improvements) or increase its
debt-to-equity ratio ( by swapping debt for equity). Although each strategy
can lead to an identical change in ROE, increasing the debt-to-equity ratio
makes the company’s ROE more sensitive to changes in operating performance (ROIC). Thus, while increasing the debt-to-equity ratio can increase
ROE, it does so by increasing the risks faced by shareholders.
To assess leverage, measure the company’s (market) debt-to-equity ratio
over time and against peers. Does the leverage ratio compare favorably with
the industry? How much risk is the company taking? We answer these and
other questions related to leverage in depth in Chapter 17.

Payout Ratio
The dividend payout ratio equals total common dividends divided by net
income available to common shareholders. We can better understand the

ADVANCED ISSUES

199

company’s financial situation by analyzing the payout ratio in relation to
its cash flow reinvestment ratio (examined earlier). On one hand, if the
company has a high dividend payout ratio and a reinvestment ratio greater
than 1, then it must be borrowing money to fund negative free cash flow, to
pay interest, or to pay dividends. But is this sustainable? On the other
hand, a company with positive free cash flow and low dividend payout is
probably paying down debt (or aggregating excess cash). In this situation, is
the company passing up the valuable tax benefits of debt or hoarding cash
unnecessarily?

General Consideration for Historical Analysis
Although it is impossible to provide a comprehensive checklist for analyzing a company’s historical financial performance, here are some things to
keep in mind:
• Look back as far as possible (at least 10 years). Long-time horizons
will allow you to determine whether the company and industry tend
to revert to some normal level of performance, and whether shortterm trends are likely to be permanent.
• Disaggregate value drivers, both ROIC and revenue growth, as far as
possible. If possible, link operational performance measures with
each key value driver.
• If there are any radical changes in performance, identify the source.
Determine whether the change is temporary or permanent, or merely
an accounting effect.

ADVANCED ISSUES
Until now, we have focused on the issues you will typically encounter
when analyzing a company. Depending on the company, you may come
across difficult (and technical) accounting issues that can affect the estimation of NOPLAT, invested capital, economic profit, and free cash flow.
Note, however, that not every issue will lead to material differences in
ROIC and growth. Before collecting extra data and estimating required unknowns, decide whether the adjustment will further your understanding
of a company and its industry. This section discusses the adjustments most
likely to affect results.

Operating Leases
When a company borrows money to purchase an asset, the asset and debt
are recorded on the company’s balance sheet, and interest is deducted from

200

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

operating profit. If instead, the company leases that same asset from another company (the lessor), it records only the periodic rental expense associated with the lease.29 Therefore, a company that chooses to lease its assets
will have artificially low operating profits ( because rental expenses include
the implicit interest expense) and artificially high capital productivity ( because the assets do not appear on the lessee’s balance sheet).
To properly compare operating margins and capital productivity across
companies and over time, convert the operating leases into purchased assets and corresponding debt. This is done in two steps. First, value the operating leases. Capitalize the asset value on the balance sheet, and add the
implied debt as a liability. (If you do this, remember to increase the company’s debt-to-value level in the cost of capital to reflect the higher debt.)
Second, break down the rental expense into two components—interest expense and depreciation. Since interest expense is a financing item, the implied interest payment should be added back to EBITA, and taxes should be
adjusted to remove the interest tax shield.
To derive the value of operating leases, we examine the determinants of
rental expense.30 To properly compensate the lessor, the rental expense includes compensation for the cost of financing the asset (at the cost of debt,
kd) and the periodic depreciation of the asset (for which we assume straightline depreciation). Thus, the periodic rental expense equals:
1


Rental Expenset = Asset Valuet−1  kd +


Asset Life 

To estimate the asset’s value, we rearrange the equation:
Asset Valuet−1 =

Rental Expenset
1
kd +
Asset Life

In 2003, Home Depot had $570 million in rental expenses. Assuming an
average asset life of 20 years and using Home Depot’s cost of debt of 4.7 percent, 2002’s operating leases are valued at $5.89 billion. Next, we make adjustments to EBITA, operating taxes, and invested capital (see Exhibit 7.21).
To determine adjusted EBITA in 2003, we add back the implied interest of
operating leases ($276 million) by multiplying the operating lease value
29

SFAS 13 details certain situations when leases must be capitalized (the asset and associated
debt must be recorded on the balance sheet). For example, if the asset is transferred to the lessee
at the end of the lease, the lease must be capitalized.
30
We would like to thank McKinsey colleagues Steven Bond, S. R. Rajan, and Werner Rehm for
deriving this method of valuing capitalized operating leases.

ADVANCED ISSUES

201

Exhibit 7.21 Home Depot and Lowe’s: Capitalizing Operating Leases
$ million
Home Depot

Lowe’s

2001

2002

2003

2001

2002

2003

Reported EBITA
Implied interest
Adjusted EBITA

4,940
288
5,228

5,838
260
6,098

6,847
276
7,123

1,798
106
1,904

2,541
106
2,647

3,178
114
3,292

Operating taxes
Cash taxes
Tax shield on lease interest expense
Adjusted cash taxes

1,909
111
2,020

2,019
98
2,117

1,935
105
2,040

614
40
654

784
41
825

1,026
44
1,069

NOPLAT (using rental expense)
NOPLAT (capitalizing operating leases)

3,031
3,208

3,819
3,981

4,912
5,083

1,184
1,250

1,757
1,822

2,152
2,223

Home Depot

Lowe’s

2001

2002

2003

2001

2002

2003

Invested capital
Capitalized operating leases
Invested capital (with operating leases)

18,176
5,459
23,635

20,296
5,890
26,185

23,101
6,554
29,655

11,152
2,189
13,341

12,678
2,373
15,051

14,250
2,762
17,012

ROIC (using rental expense)
ROIC (capitalizing operating leases)

17.4%
14.3%

19.9%
16.0%

22.6%
18.2%

11.6%
10.3%

14.7%
12.8%

16.0%
13.9%

($5,890 million) times the cost of debt (4.7 percent). The tax shield associated with operating lease interest equals the marginal tax rate (38.2 percent) times the implied interest expense ($276 million). In addition, we
increase invested capital by the value of the operating leases.
When we convert from rental expense to capitalized operating leases,
Home Depot’s ROIC ( based on average capital) drops from 22.6 percent to
18.2 percent in 2003. The drop for Lowe’s is smaller, but significant
nonetheless. However, the smaller percentage does not necessarily imply
less value creation. Why? Because the cost of capital will also be lower after
adjusting downward for operating leases (we discuss the cost of capital in
Chapter 10).

Expensed Investment: Advertising and Research and Development
When a company builds a plant or purchases equipment, the asset is capitalized on the balance sheet and depreciated over time. Conversely, when a
company creates an intangible asset, such as a brand name or patent, the

202

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

entire outlay must be expensed immediately.31 For firms with significant intangible assets, such as technology companies and pharmaceuticals, failure
to recognize intangible assets can lead to a significant underestimation of a
company’s invested capital and, thus, overstate ROIC.
When you evaluate performance internally, many expenses, such as
brand building, customer development, research and development, and
training, should be capitalized and amortized (for purposes of internal economic evaluation, not external reporting). But when you examine a company from the outside, you can only evaluate two expensed investments:
advertising and research and development (R&D).
The first step in capitalizing an expense like R&D is to choose an amortization period, for example 10 years. Use product and industry characteristics to guide your choice. Next, using the financial statements from 10 years
prior (or whatever the amortization period is), treat the year’s R&D no differently than you would capital expenditures. This means eliminating the
R&D expenditure from the income statement and placing the amount on
the balance sheet. Repeat the process for the next year, except that you also
deduct R&D amortization from both the income statement (as an expense)
and the balance sheet (as a deduction to accumulated R&D).
In Exhibit 7.22, we demonstrate the process by capitalizing R&D expenses for Merck. To adjust 2003 EBITA, start with the original EBITA
($8,651 million), add back the current year’s R&D ($3,280 million), and subtract the current amortization ($1,936 million) of the accumulated R&D
asset. This leads to an adjusted EBITA of $9,995 million. Although EBITA
will change, taxes should not be adjusted when capitalizing R&D. The R&D
tax shield is real and is related to operations (unlike the interest tax shield).
Therefore, the tax shield should remain as part of operations.
To adjust Merck’s invested capital, start with 2002’s accumulated R&D
($12,163 million), add 2003’s R&D ($3,280 million), and subtract 2003’s
amortization ($1,936 million). Thus, by the end of 2003, Merck’s accumulated R&D ( based on a 10-year asset life) was $13,506 million. As the exhibit
shows, by 2003 nearly one-third of Merck’s adjusted invested capital consisted of capitalized R&D. When R&D is expensed, Merck’s return on average invested capital is estimated at 21.5 percent. When R&D is capitalized,
ROIC drops to 15.2 percent.
Unlike ROIC, free cash flow will not change when expenses are capitalized. When an expense is capitalized, the expense is moved from gross
cash flow to gross investment. But since both are components of free cash
flow, it remains unaffected. Since amortization is noncash, it also has no
31
Although most development must be expensed, companies can capitalize software development after the product becomes technologically feasible. According FASB’s Statement of Position 86, development costs can be capitalized and straight-line amortized over the estimated
economic life of the product.

ADVANCED ISSUES

203

Exhibit 7.22 Merck: Capitalizing R&D
$ million
1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

EBITA
Annual R&D expenditure
Annual amortization
Adjusted EBITA

7,594
2,119
(1,347)
8,367

9,089
2,344
(1,484)
9,949

9,728
2,456
(1,633)
10,552

9,668
2,677
(1,780)
10,565

8,651
3,280
(1,936)
9,995

Operating taxes (at 38% ofEBITA)
NOPLAT

(2,886)
5,481

(3,454)
6,495

(3,697)
6,855

(3,674)
6,891

(3,288)
6,707

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

Beginning balance
Annual R&D expenditure
Annual amortization
(10 year life)
Ending accumulated R&D

8,809
2,119

9,582
2,344

10,442
2,456

11,265
2,677

12,163
3,280

(1,347)
9,582

(1,484)
10,442

(1,633)
11,265

(1,780)
12,163

(1,936)
13,506

Invested capital
Accumulated R&D
Adjusted invested capital

26,533
9,582
36,114

29,266
10,442
39,707

33,243
11,265
44,508

33,885
12,163
46,047

28,545
13,506
42,051

ROIC (R&D expensed)
ROIC (R&D capitalized)

22.1%
16.1%

23.3%
17.1%

21.9%
16.3%

20.5%
15.2%

21.5%
15.2%

effect (it is deducted to compute NOPLAT but added back to calculate
gross cash flow). Thus, capitalizing R&D should have no effect on valuation ( beyond how it changes your perceptions of the company’s future
ability to create value).

Employee Stock Options
By the end of 2003, Home Depot employees held options to buy 2.5 million
shares of the company’s stock. An alternative to cash compensation, options give the right, but not the obligation, to buy company stock at a
specified price. Given the unlimited upside (and limited downside), options can be extremely valuable to the employee. Yet before 2005, companies in the United States and Europe were not required to report the
value of options granted as a compensation expense.32 In fact, before the
rule changes requiring expensing, only 117 of the companies in the S&P
500 voluntarily expensed employee stock options. Therefore, to assure
32

Since January 1, 2005, European listed companies are required under IFRS to ref lect the cost
of all share-based payments, including employee stock options, as an expense. In 2004, the Financial Accounting Standards Board announcedits intention to require U.S. listed companies to
expense stock-based compensation starting June 15, 2005.

204

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 7.23 Home Depot: 10-K Note on Stock-Based Compensation
$ million

Net earnings, as reported
Stock-based compensation expense included in
reported net earnings, net of related tax effects
Total stock-based compensation expense
determined under fair value based method for all awards,
net of related tax effects
Pro forma net earnings

2001

2002

2003

3,044

3,664

4,304

13

10

42

(257)
2,800

(260)
3,414

(279)
4,067

Source: Home Depot 10-K, 2003.

consistency across years, it is important to analyze and expense historical
stock-based compensation.
If the company did not expense options historically, we recommend estimating the impact on ROIC. To determine the value of options not included in Home Depot’s income statement, we take the difference between
net earnings ($4,304 million) and pro forma net earnings ($4,067 million)
found in the company’s footnotes (see Exhibit 7.23). For Home Depot, this
difference equals $237 million. Since this is an after-tax number, it must be
converted to a pretax value, using the company’s marginal tax rate (38.2
percent). The pretax compensation expense, estimated at $383 million,33 is
then deducted from EBITA.
Since ROIC is based on cash taxes, and since option expenses are not tax
deductible at the time of grant, no adjustment should be made to taxes. For
companies that expense options, reported taxes are based on income after
option expenses, even though the options are not deductible until exercise.
Therefore, accountants create a deferred tax account (since cash taxes are
higher than reported taxes). Convert reported taxes to cash taxes (for companies that expense options) by subtracting the increase in deferred tax assets from reported taxes. NOPLAT equals adjusted EBITA less cash taxes.
No adjustment should be made to invested capital. When a company issues options, it is essentially transferring a portion of ownership from one
group (current shareholders) to another (employees).
To value a company with significant employee options, you have two
choices for treating future stock options compensation: include the future
options granted as part of operations (and hence part of free cash flow) or
value them separately. Subsequently, the process for adjusting free cash
33
Home Depot ’s estimated options expense is less than 5 percent of EBIT. For some companies,
especially technology companies, the options expense can be quite large. In 2003, Yahoo reported $238 million in net income. Had the company expensed employee stock option grants,
net income would have fallen 85 percent to $35 million.

ADVANCED ISSUES

205

Exhibit 7.24 Treatment of Provisions and Reserves
Treatment in
NOPLAT

Treatment in
invested capital

Treatment in
valuation

Product returns
and warranties

Deduct provision
from revenue to
determine NOPLAT.

Deduct reserve
from operating
assets to determine
invested capital.

Provision is already
part of free cash flow.

Long-term
operating
provisions

Plant
decommissioning
costs and
retirement plans

Deduct operating
portion from revenue
to determine
NOPLAT and treat
interest portion as
nonoperating.

Treat reserve as a
debt equivalent.

Deduct reserve’s
present value from the
value of operations.

Nonoperating
provisions

Restructuring
charges, such as
expected
severance due to
layoffs

Convert provision
into cash provision
and treat as
nonoperating.

Treat reserve as a
debt equivalent.

Deduct reserve’s
present value from the
value of operations.

Income
smoothing
provision

Provisions for
the sole purpose
of income
smoothing

Eliminate provision
by converting accrual
provision into cash
provision.

Treat reserve as an
equity equivalent.

Since income
smoothing provisions
are noncash, there is
no effect.

Classification

Examples

Ongoing
operating
provisions

flow depends on the choice of valuation method. We defer this discussion to
Chapter 11.

Provisions and Reserves
Provisions are noncash expenses that reflect future costs or expected
losses.34 Companies take provisions by reducing current income and setting
up a corresponding reserve as a liability (or deducting the amount from the
relevant asset).
For the purpose of analyzing and valuing a company, we categorize provisions into one of four types: ongoing operating provisions, long-term operating provisions, nonoperating restructuring provisions, or provisions
created for the purpose of smoothing income (transferring income from one
period to another). Based on the characteristics of each provision, adjust the
financial statements to better reflect the company’s true operating performance. For example, ongoing operating provisions are treated like any other
operating expense, whereas restructuring provisions are converted from an
accrual to a cash basis and treated as nonoperating. Exhibit 7.24 summarizes the four provision types.
34

A note on terminology: In the United States, the term provision refers to an income statement
expense (a charge against income to ref lect decline in the value of an asset or expected loss),
and the term reserve refers to its corresponding liability. In continental Europe, the terms are
used interchangeably.

206

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 7.25 Provisions and Reserves in the Financial Statements
$ million
Income statement

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Revenue
Operating costs
Provision for product returns
Provision for plant decommissioning
Income smoothing provision
EBITA

1,000
(550)
(100)
(24)
(40)
286

1,200
(660)
(120)
(27)
(40)
353

1,400
(910)
(140)
(30)
80
400

1,600
(880)
(160)
0
0
560

0
286

(30)
323

0
400

0
560

Provision for restructuring
Net income

Balance sheet

Year 0

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Operating assets

700

840

980

1,120

0

Reserve for product returns
Reserve for plant decommissioning
Reserve for restructuring
Reserve for income smoothing
Equity
Liabilities and shareholder equity

150
119
0
0
431
700

180
144
0
40
476
840

210
170
30
80
490
980

240
0
0
0
880
1,120

0
0
0
0
0
0

Although reclassification leads to better analysis, the way you adjust
the financials for provisions should not affect the company’s valuation (no
matter how you classify a provision). The company’s valuation depends
on how and when cash flows through the business, not on accrual-based
accounting.
In Exhibit 7.25, we present the financial statements for a hypothetical
company that recognizes four types of provisions: a provision for future
product returns, an environmental provision for decommissioning the company’s plant in four years, an artificial provision for smoothing income, and
a restructuring provision for future severance payments. In this example,
we reorganized forecasted statements rather than historical statements
(whose analysis would be the same) to also demonstrate how each would be
treated from a valuation perspective. For simplicity, we assume the company pays no taxes and has no debt.
The process for adjusting the financial statements depends on the type
of provision. We use Exhibit 7.26 to discuss each provision in turn. All numbers in parentheses refer to year 1 financials.

Provisions related to ongoing operations When a company expects that
some of its products will be returned, warranties a product, or self-insures

ADVANCED ISSUES

207

Exhibit 7.26 ROIC with Provisions and Reserves
$ million
NOPLAT

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Reported EBITA
Interest associated with plant decommissioning
Increase (decrease) in inc. smoothing reserve
NOPLAT

286
12
40
337

353
14
40
407

400
17
(80)
337

560
0
0
560

Reconciliation to net income
Net income
Interest associated with plant decommissioning
Increase (decrease) in inc. smoothing reserve
Provision for restructuring
NOPLAT

286
12
40
0
337

323
14
40
30
407

400
17
(80)
0
337

560
0
0
0
560

Invested capital

Year 0

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Operating assets
Reserve for product returns
Invested capital

700
(150)
550

840
(180)
660

980
(210)
770

1,120
(240)
880

0
0
0

Reserve for plant decommissioning
Reserve for restructuring
Reserve for income smoothing
Equity
Invested capital

119
0
0
431
550

144
0
40
476
660

170
30
80
490
770

0
0
0
880
880

0
0
0
0
0

61.4%

61.7%

43.8%

63.6%

ROIC (on beginning of year capital)

a service, it must create a liability when that product or service is sold. If the
reserve is related to the ongoing operations and grows in step with sales,
the reserve should be treated the same as other noninterest-bearing liabilities (e.g., accounts payable). Specifically, the provision should be deducted
from revenues to determine EBITA, and the reserve ($180) should be netted
against operating assets ($840). Since the provision and reserve are treated
as operating items, they appear as part of free cash flow and should not be
valued separately.

Long-term operating provisions Sometimes, when a company decommissions a plant, it must pay for cleanup and other costs. Assume our hypothetical company owns a plant that operates for 10 years and requires $200
million in decommissioning costs. Rather than expense the cash outflow
in a lump sum at the time of decommissioning, the company builds a reserve as if the company borrowed the money gradually over time. Thus, if
the company borrowed $12.5 million annually at 10 percent, the debt
(recorded as a reserve) would grow to $200 million by the plant’s final

208

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

year of operation.35 If the provision is material, it will be recorded in the
company’s footnotes as follows:
Year
0

1

2

3

Balance Sheet
Starting reserve
Plant decommissioning expense (1)
Interest cost (2)
Decommissioning payout

96.8
12.5
9.7
0.0

119.1
12.5
11.9
0.0

143.5
12.5
14.4
0.0

170.4
12.5
17.0
(200.0)

Ending reserve

119.1

143.5

170.4

0.0

Income Statement
Reported provision (1 + 2)

22.2

24.5

26.9

29.6

In year 1, two years before decommissioning, the reported provision is
$24.5 million. The provision consists of the $12.5 million annual decommissioning expense and $11.9 million in hypothetical interest expense (the interest that would have been paid if the company gradually borrowed the
decommissioning expense). Therefore, when calculating adjusted EBITA,
add back $11.9 million to reported EBITA to remove the interest charges.
To measure NOPLAT and invested capital consistently, treat the reserve
($144 million in year 1) as a source of debt-based capital (and not netted
against operating assets to determine invested capital). When you treat the
plant closure reserve as a debt equivalent, the final payment will not flow
through free cash flow. Therefore, for companies that use the present value
methodology with implied interest, the current reported reserve ($119.1
million in year 0) should be subtracted from the value of operations
($1,000.2 million) to determine equity value (see Exhibit 7.27).

One-time restructuring provisions When management decides to restructure a company, it will often recognize certain future expenses (e.g., severance) immediately. We recommend treating one-time provisions as
nonoperating and treating the corresponding reserve as a debt equivalent.
In year 2, our hypothetical company declared a $30 million restructuring
provision, which will be paid in year 3. Since the restructuring is nonoperating, it is not deducted from revenues to determine NOPLAT. Rather, it is
included in the reconciliation to net income. Because we plan to value the
provision on a cash basis, the noncash reserve is treated as a debt equivalent
and is not netted against operating asset to determine invested capital.
35

A company that borrows $CF annually at R percent will owe $FV at the end of N years:
CF =

R × FV


1
(1 + R) 1 −
N 
 (1 + R) 
N

ADVANCED ISSUES

209

Exhibit 7.27 Enterprise DCF with Provisions and Reserves
$ million
Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

337
(110)
227

407
(110)
297

337
(110)
227

560
880
1,440

From the investor’s perspective:
Provision for restructuring
(Increase) decrease in restructuring reserve
Cash-based restructuring provision

0
0
0

30
(30)
0

0
30
30

0
0
0

Interest associated with plant decommissioning
(Increase) decrease in plant closure reserve
Dividends
Free cash flow

12
(24)
240
227

14
(27)
310
297

17
170
10
227

0
0
1,440
1,440

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

227
0.91
206.8

297
0.83
245.8

227
0.75
170.9

1,440
0.68
983.5

NOPLAT
Net investment in invested capital
Free cash flow

Present
value at 10%
22.5

Free cash flow valuation

Free cash flow
Discount factor (at 10%)
Discounted cash flow

Year 0
Value of operations
PV (restructuring provision)
Reserve for plant decommissioning
Equity value

1,607
(22.5)
(119.1)
1,465.4

Debt equivalent (present value)
Debt equivalent (reported at time = 0)

Since nonoperating income (and expenses) does not flow through free
cash flow, the restructuring expense must be valued separately on a cash
basis. To convert accrual-based restructuring expenses to cash, start with
the restructuring expense, and subtract the increase in the restructuring
reserve. In year 2, this leads to a cash flow of $0 (see Exhibit 7.27). In year
3, this leads to a cash flow of −$30 million. The estimated present value of
the nonoperating cash flow stream equals $22.5 million, which must be deducted from the value of operations to determine equity value.

Income-smoothing provisions In some countries, provisions can be manipulated to smooth earnings. In Exhibit 7.25, our hypothetical company
was able to show a smooth growth in reported EBITA and net income by
using a smoothing provision. Although we title the account “provision for
income smoothing,” actual companies use wording more subtle, such as
“other provisions.” For our hypothetical company, a provision was recorded

210

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

in years 1 and 2, and was reversed in year 3.36 By using an income-smoothing
provision, the company hid its year 3 decline in operating performance
(operating costs rose from 70 percent to 80 percent of sales).
To properly evaluate the company’s performance, eliminate any incomesmoothing provisions. Do this by adding the income-smoothing provision
back to reported EBITA (essentially undoing the income-smoothing provision). In this way, we are converting the provision to a cash (vs. accrual)
basis and subsequently need to treat the reserve as an equity equivalent
(the process is identical to deferred taxes). Since income-smoothing provisions are entirely noncash, no adjustment must be made to the company’s
valuation.

Provisions and taxes In most situations, provisions are tax deductible only
when cash is dispersed, not when the provision is reported. Thus, most provisions will give rise to deferred tax assets. We recommend using cash taxes
when including provisions in the DCF valuation. This requires netting deferred tax assets against deferred tax liabilities (from depreciation) and subtracting the increase in net deferred tax liabilities from adjusted taxes.
Pensions and Postretirement Medical Benefits
Pension and postretirement medical benefits are a special case of long-term
provisions described in the previous section. Retirement benefits differ
from other long-term provisions primarily because they (although not always) are prefunded with cash. The cash is held in an off-balance-sheet account titled “plan assets.” Since the expected (dollar) return on plan assets
is included as part of reported EBITA, retirement provisions can lead to serious distortions in operating performance. Thus, we reorganize the financial statements by allocating pension expenses, prepaid pension assets, and
unfunded pension liabilities into operating and nonoperating items.
Pension expenses are composed of four primary items: service cost, interest cost on plan liabilities, expected return on plan assets, and recognized gains and losses.37 Exhibit 7.28 presents the 10-K pension note for
Lockheed Martin. To determine the portion of pension expense that is
compensation (and hence operating), we combine service cost and amortization of prior service cost, which represents today’s value of promised retirement payments. In 2003, Lockheed Martin had $640 million in service
cost and $79 million in prior service cost, for a total operating expense of
$719 million.
36

Provisions for income smoothing are often categorized as “general” or “other” provisions.
For more on pension accounting, see D. Kieso, J. Weygandt, and T. Warfield, Intermediate Accounting (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2004).

37

ADVANCED ISSUES

211

Exhibit 7.28 Lockheed Martin: 10-K Note on Retirement Plans
$ million

Service cost
Amortization of prior service cost
Interest cost
Expected return on plan assets
Recognized net actuarial losses (gains)
Amortization of transition asset
Total net pension expense (income)

2001

2002

2003

523
64

565
72

640
79

1,357
(2,177)
(117)
(4)
(354)

1,401
(2,162)
(33)
(3)
(160)

1,453
(1,748)
62
(2)
484

Operating

Nonoperating

Source: Lockheed Martin 10-K, 2003.

The remaining items, interest cost and plan returns (both expected and
the portion of unexpected returns being recognized), are related to the relative performance of the plan assets, not the operations of the business. If the
return on plan assets happened to equal the interest cost on the pension liability, the two would cancel, and only the service cost would remain. Since
plan assets fluctuate (with the performance of the market), these two items
will not cancel. Consider the bull market of the late 1990s. Strong stock returns drove pension assets up; this raised the expected dollar return on plan
assets, driving down reported pension expense. Lockheed Martin’s 2001 expected dollar returns were so large, in fact, that the company reported a net
pension gain as part of EBITA, rather than as a net expense. As the market fell
over the next two years, asset values fell as well. Lockheed Martin wound up
adding more than $460 million to its reported operating costs, none of which
was actually related to operations.
To remove plan performance from operating expenses (see Exhibit
7.29), we increase reported EBITA ($1,976 million) by the interest cost

Exhibit 7.29 Lockheed Martin: EBITA Pension Adjustment
$ million
2001

2002

2003

Revenue

23,990

26,578

31,824

EBITA
Add: interest cost1
Subtract: return on plan assets2
Adjusted EBITA

1,787
1,357
(2,298)
846

1,949
1,401
(2,198)
1,152

1,976
1,453
(1,688)
1,741

EBITA/Revenues (raw)
EBITA/Revenues (adjusted for pension)

7.4%
3.5%

7.3%
4.3%

6.2%
5.5%

1
Interest cost disclosed in Lockheed Martin 10-K (see Exhibit 7.28).
2

Return on plan assets equals expected returns plus recognized net actuarial losses plus amortization of transition asset disclosed in
Lockheed Martin 10-K (see Exhibit 7.28).

212

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

($1,453 million) and decrease it by the combined return on plan assets
($1,688 million). This lowers EBITA in 2003 by more than $200 million.
Consider the impact on Lockheed Martin’s operating margin over the past
three years. In actuality, Lockheed Martin’s (adjusted) operating margins
have been steadily improving, even though the income statement hides
this fact.
Since pension expenses are tax deductible, remove nonoperating pension expenses from reported taxes. At Lockheed Martin’s marginal tax rate
of 33.1 percent, reported taxes would be increased by $481 million ($1,453
million × 33.1 percent), and decreased by $559 million ($1,688 million × 33.1
percent) to determine operating taxes.
Pension accounting will also affect invested capital. When the reported
pension expenses differ from cash payments to the plan, the difference is
recorded on the company’s balance sheet. The recorded asset (when cash
payments exceed expenses) or liability (when expenses exceed cash payments) either is unrelated to operations (e.g., when pension assets rise) or is
a debt the company owes (when cash payments are smaller than the present
value of the promised benefit). Therefore, any assets should be treated as
nonoperating, and any liabilities should be treated as debt equivalents.
Since prepaid pension assets and unfunded liabilities are moved to the
balance sheet over long periods of time (under U.S. GAAP and IFRS), they
do not reflect current valuation of the plan assets and liabilities. To determine the actual present value of the funding shortfall, you must consult the
company’s footnotes. (For more on pension valuation, see Chapter 11.)

Minority Interest
A minority interest occurs when a third party owns some percentage of one
the company’s consolidated subsidiaries. If a minority interest exists, treat
the balance sheet amount as an equity equivalent. Treat the earnings attributable to minority interest as a financing cost similar to interest, with an
appropriate adjustment for income taxes. Thus, NOPLAT (for use with
ROIC and FCF) will exclude the effects of minority interest. After-tax minority interest should be a financing flow.

Inflation
While ROIC provides the single best measure for evaluating the operational
performance of a company, it can be distorted by inflation. Consider a company earning $10 in NOPLAT on $100 in invested capital. If inflation doubles both prices and costs, profits will also double. Yet since invested capital
is measured at cost, it will remain constant. With profits doubling and capital remaining constant, ROIC will artificially double from 10 percent to 20
percent. If the company’s cost of capital equals 10 percent, does this mean

ADVANCED ISSUES

213

the company is now creating value? Probably not. An identical company
started today with similar capacity and similar features would require $200
in investment ( based on the inflated currency), earn $20, and have an ROIC
of 10 percent. Since the two companies are identical from an operating perspective, the older company should not appear superior.38
If inflation is significant, such long-term assets as net PP&E should be
adjusted upward for inflation. Working backward, you must decompose the
fixed assets into layers based on when they were purchased. Each layer is
then revalued using a price index. Since depreciation is also based on historical cost, it should be increased as well. Do not adjust taxes, however.
Taxes are based on historical depreciation, and increasing depreciation
would overestimate the tax shield. To calculate an inflation-adjusted ROIC,
divide adjusted NOPLAT by the adjusted invested capital. Since ROIC is
now in real terms (excluding inflation), it must be compared with the real
cost of capital. (See Chapter 22 for an example of this approach.)

Market versus Book-Invested Capital
The traditional measure of ROIC divides NOPLAT by book-invested capital.
Thus, ROIC represents the rate of return on original cost (less depreciation). Although this provides a good ex-post measure of performance, it
should not be used to make entry and exit decisions. Consider a company
that built a facility for $1 billion. The facility is currently generating $10
million in NOPLAT. Because the facility’s 1 percent ROIC is well below its
10 percent cost of capital, the CEO recommends selling the facility. But
what if the facility is worth only $50 million on the open market? In this
case, the rate of return ( based on market-based opportunity costs) is 20 percent. At this price, the CEO would be better off keeping the facility, assuming profits remain constant.

An Alternative Measure: Cash Flow Return on Investment
For companies with large, uneven capital expenditures, ROIC may vary systematically over the asset’s life, and this can give a distorted picture about
when value is created. In this case, it may be helpful to convert ROIC into a
measure similar to internal rate of return (IRR). One common measure
based on the principles of IRR is CFROI (cash flow return on investment). 39

38
In this example, we argue the two companies are comparable because only inf lation causes
differences in ROIC. If, however, the older company were able to purchase assets at a discount
(for a reason other than inf lation), it would have a true competitive advantage. Thus, using replacement cost to handle inf lation can improperly mask superior performance.
39
For more information, see B. Madden, CFROI Valuation: A Total System Approach to Valuing the
Firm (Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1999).

214

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Consider a livery company that plans to purchase a new taxi for $20,000.
The vehicle will operate for four years. Since revenues are independent of
the taxi’s age, the taxi will earn relatively constant profits over the four
years. Assume the company’s NOPLAT, invested capital, and ROIC per taxi
are as follows:
Year ($ Thousands)
0
Revenues
Operating costs
Depreciation
NOPLAT
Invested capital
ROIC (on beginning of
year capital)

20.0

1

2

3

4

100.0
(93.0)
(5.0)

100.0
(93.0)
(5.0)

100.0
(93.0)
(5.0)

100.0
(93.0)
(5.0)

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

15.0

10.0

5.0

0.0

10%

13%

20%

40%

Note how the investment’s ROIC rises from 10 percent to 40 percent over its
life. If the company’s cost of capital is 15 percent, it appears that the investment destroys value during its first two years but creates value during the
last two years.
Alternatively, you could calculate the internal rate of return for each
taxi. Using the classic IRR formula, you would find the taxi earns an IRR
of 15 percent over its life. Calculating IRR, however, requires making subjective forecasts, so it does not offer a consistent measure of historical
performance.
CFROI removes the subjectivity of year-by-year forecasting yet provides
a smoothed measure. To calculate CFROI in a given year, use the traditional
IRR methodology of setting the net present value to 0 and then solving for
the discount rate. To avoid the subjectivity of forecasting, CFROI assumes a
fixed cash flow for a fixed number of periods (the company’s estimated asset
life). To calculate CFROI, we need three components: the initial investment,
the annual cash flow, and residual value. The initial investment equals the
gross invested capital measured in the prior period (gross invested capital
equals invested capital plus accumulated deprecation). The annual cash flow
equals NOPLAT plus depreciation. The residual value equals NOPLAT plus
depreciation, plus the return of the original working capital.
Exhibit 7.30 calculates the CFROI in 2003 for Home Depot. To measure
initial investment, we add 2002’s invested capital ($25,557 million) to 2002’s
accumulated depreciation ($3,565 million). The annual gross cash flow over
20 years is $6,157 million (as measured by 2003 gross cash flow), and the
final year’s return of 2002 working capital equals $2,746 million. Using
Excel’s goal seek function, we arrive at an internal rate of return (CFROI) of
20.7 percent.

ADVANCED ISSUES

215

Exhibit 7.30 Home Depot: Estimating CFROI, 2003
$ million, percent
Working capital
Long-term net operating assets
Invested capital (2002)

2,746
22,811
25,557

Accumulated depreciation
Gross invested capital (2002)

3,565
29,122

(29,122)

6,157

0
Year

1

CFROI1 = 20.7%

Gross cash flow (2003)
Return of 2002 working capital
Total
6,157

6,157

3
2
Assumes constant cash flow over asset life

6,157
2,746
8,903

6,157

8,903

19

20

1

Results of Internal Rate of Return (IRR) calculation on cash flow stream.

CFROI captures the lumpiness of the investment better than ROIC. But it
is complex to calculate and requires assumptions about the company’s estimated asset life. Weighing the simplicity of ROIC versus the smoothness of
CFROI, we suggest using CFROI only when companies have the following
characteristics:
• Lumpy capital expenditure patterns
• Long-lived fixed assets (over 15 years)
• Large fixed assets to working capital

HEINEKEN CASE
To wrap up this chapter and each of the next four chapters, we present a case study,
Heineken N.V.40 This case will illustrate the concepts from each of the chapters and
provide a comprehensive integration of the pieces of an enterprise DCF valuation and
economic profit valuation.
Heineken, based in the Netherlands, is the world’s third largest beer company, behind Anheuser-Busch and SABMiller. Its main brands are the popular Heineken and
Amstel beers. In 2003, the last historical year prior to our valuation, Heineken had net
turnover (revenues) of €9.3 billion and employed more than 61,000 people worldwide.
The company is also the most international brewer: only 6 percent of its volume comes
from the Netherlands. Heineken earns 57 percent of net turnover in Western Europe,
40

The authors would like to thank Meg Smoot and Yasser Salem for their support of the analysis of
Heineken. This case was prepared before the merger of Interbrew and AmBev. The combined company, InBev, is now the world’s largest brewer.

216

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 7.31 Heineken: Historical Income Statements
€ million

Net turnover
Raw materials and consumables
Marketing and selling expenses
Staff costs
EBITDA
Depreciation
EBITA
Amortization of goodwill
Operating profit
Interest paid
Interest received
Profit before tax
Taxation
Results of nonconsolidated
participating interest (after tax)
Minority interest
Income before extraordinary items
Extraordinary items (after tax)
Net profit
Shareholders’ equity
Position as of 1 January
Exchange differences
Reclassification of dividend payable
Revaluations
Goodwill written off
Net profit for the year
Dividends
Position as of 31 December

1998
5,453
(2,593)
(790)
(1,042)
1,028
(369)
659
0
659
(53)
42
648
(235)
44

1999
6,164
(2,890)
(964)
(1,132)
1,178
(379)
799
0
799
(80)
39
759
(265)
51

2000
7,014
(3,246)
(1,107)
(1,301)
1,360
(439)
921
0
921
(109)
43
855
(277)
59

2001
7,937
(3,645)
(1,281)
(1,417)
1,594
(469)
1,125
0
1,125
(118)
47
1,054
(327)
45

2002
9,011
(4,011)
(1,585)
(1,642)
1,773
(491)
1,282
0
1,282
(146)
37
1,173
(364)
48

2003
9,255
(4,461)
(1,131)
(1,832)
1,831
(578)
1,253
(31)
1,222
(180)
40
1,082
(319)
101

(12)
445
0
445

(28)
516
0
516

(16)
621
0
621

(57)
715
52
767

(62)
795
0
795

(66)
798
0
798

2,316
0
0
(69)
(278)
445
(115)
2,299

2,299
0
0
35
(106)
516
(125)
2,618

2,618
0
0
60
(778)
621
(125)
2,396

2,396
0
0
72
(320)
767
(157)
2,758

2,758
(107)
0
32
(778)
795
(157)
2,543

2,543
(152)
94
41
0
798
(157)
3,167

12 percent in Central/Eastern Europe, 17 percent in North America, 9 percent in
Africa and the Middle East, and the remaining 5 percent in the Asia/Pacific region. In
addition, only 30 percent of its volume comes from its flagship brands; the rest is from
Heineken-owned regional brands.
In this chapter of the case study, we analyze Heineken’s historical performance,
summarize the beer market, and compare Heineken’s performance with the market.

REORGANIZATION OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Exhibits 7.31 through 7.38 detail the historical financial analysis of Heineken. Exhibits 7.31 and 7.32 present Heineken’s income statement and balance sheet for the
years 1998 through 2003, using the British nomenclature that Heineken uses in its
English annual report (for example, “turnover ” refers to revenues). Exhibits 7.33
through 7.35 present the calculations of Heineken’s NOPLAT, invested capital, and

REORGANIZATION OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

217

Exhibit 7.32 Heineken: Historical Balance Sheets
€ million
1998
Operating cash
109
Excess cash and marketable securities
839
Accounts receivable
667
Stocks (inventory)
452
Other current assets
108
Total current assets
2,175
Tangible fixed assets
2,605
Goodwill
0
Nonconsolidated participating interests 256
Deferred tax assets
0
Other financial fixed assets
233
Total assets
5,270

1999
123
1,084
746
490
157
2,600
2,964
0
189
0
233
5,986

2000
140
684
858
550
166
2,398
3,250
0
279
35
301
6,263

2001
159
1,016
985
692
207
3,059
3,605
0
183
30
318
7,195

2002
180
598
1,066
765
204
2,813
4,133
0
412
22
401
7,781

2003
185
1,231
1,205
834
174
3,629
5,053
1,093
433
18
671
10,897

Short-term debt
Accounts payable
Tax payable
Dividend payable
Other current liabilities
Total current liabilities

347
412
221
58
422
1,460

488
457
289
87
538
1,860

428
529
288
78
569
1,892

570
620
335
107
603
2,235

1,039
629
322
105
554
2,649

1,113
745
392
16
644
2,910

Long-term debt
Deferred tax liabilities
Retirement liabilities
Other provisions
Restructuring provision
Total long-term liabilities

522
273
47
125
289
1,255

490
295
48
158
269
1,260

875
312
100
158
406
1,851

797
357
112
133
422
1,821

1,215
381
352
133
115
2,196

2,721
415
526
133
293
4,088

Shareholders’ equity
Minority interest
Total equity

2,299
256
2,555

2,618
248
2,866

2,396
124
2,520

2,758
381
3,139

2,543
393
2,936

3,167
732
3,899

Total liabilities and
shareholders’ equity

5,270

5,986

6,263

7,195

7,781

10,897

free cash flow for each year. Exhibit 7.36 shows the calculations of Heineken’s economic profit. The remaining exhibits offer the backup calculations and ratios to be
used for forecasting.
Heineken made a significant acquisition in 2003 and changed its accounting policy for discounts provided to distributors and retailers. Therefore, its 2003 results are
not directly comparable with those of prior years. For 2003, we calculate ROIC using
end-of-year capital rather than average or beginning capital (our standard practice) because Heineken’s 2003 income statement contains most of a year ’s income from the
acquired company but its beginning balance sheet contains none of the acquired company’s capital.
In our analysis of Heineken’s financial statements, several accounting issues merit
special attention:

218

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 7.33 Heineken: Historical NOPLAT
€ million
EBITA
Adjustment for retirement
related liability
Increase/(decrease)
in other provisions
Adjusted EBITA
Taxes on EBITA
Increase/(decrease)
in deferred tax liability
NOPLAT
Taxes on EBITA
Reported taxes
Tax shield on interest paid
Taxes on interest received
Tax shield on retirement
related liabilities
Taxes on EBITA
Reconciliation to net profit
Net profit
Increase/(decrease)
in other provisions
Increase/(decrease)
in deferred tax liability
Extraordinary items
Minority interest
Results of nonconsolidated
participating interests
Amortization of goodwill
Adjusted net profit
Interest paid after tax
Interest expense on retirement
related liabilities
Total income available to investors
Interest received after tax
NOPLAT

1999
799
2

2000
921
4

2001
1,125
4

2002
1,282
14

2003
1,253
21

34

(0)

(25)

0

0

835
(280)
22

925
(302)
(18)

1,104
(353)
50

1,296
(406)
32

1,274
(375)
38

577

606

801

922

937

(265)
(28)
14
(1)

(277)
(38)
15
(1)

(327)
(41)
16
(2)

(364)
(50)
13
(5)

(319)
(62)
14
(7)

(280)

(302)

(353)

(406)

(375)

516
34

621
(0)

767
(25)

795
0

798
0

22

(18)

50

32

38

0
28
(51)

0
16
(59)

(52)
57
(45)

0
62
(48)

0
66
(101)

0
549
52
1

0
560
71
3

0
752
77
3

0
841
96
9

31
832
118
14

603
(26)
577

633
(28)
606

832
(31)
801

946
(24)
922

964
(26)
937

• Net turnover: Beginning in 2003, Dutch reporting rules changed the method for
determining net turnover. Now all discounts and excise duties directly
attributable to the turnover must be deducted from gross turnover to determine
net turnover. Before 2003, net turnover included excise duties collected from
customers. Heineken then showed the transmittal of these duties to the
government as an expense. To improve comparability, we have shown net
turnover less excise duties for all years. Heineken does not disclose the
necessary prior-year information to adjust for discounts.

REORGANIZATION OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

219

Exhibit 7.34 Heineken: Historical Invested Capital
€ million
1998
Operating current assets
1,336
Operating current liabilities
(1,055)
Operating working capital
282
Tangible fixed assets
2,605
Operating invested capital
2,887
(before goodwill)
Goodwill
0
Cumulative goodwill written
1,046
off and amortized
Operating invested capital
3,932
(after goodwill)
Excess cash and marketable securities
839
Nonconsolidated participating
256
interests
Other financial fixed assets
233
Total investor funds
5,261

1999
1,516
(1,284)
232
2,964
3,196

2000
1,714
(1,386)
328
3,250
3,578

2001
2,043
(1,558)
485
3,605
4,090

2002
2,215
(1,505)
710
4,133
4,843

2003
2,398
(1,781)
617
5,053
5,670

0
1,152

0
1,930

0
2,250

0
3,028

1,093
3,059

4,348

5,508

6,340

7,871

9,822

1,084
189

684
279

1,016
183

598
412

1,231
433

233
5,853

301
6,772

318
7,857

401
9,282

671
12,157

Shareholders’ equity
Cumulative goodwill written
off and amortized
Minority interest
Other provisions
Net deferred taxes
Dividend payable
Adjusted equity
Debt
Retirement liabilities
Restructuring provision
Total investor funds

2,299
1,046

2,618
1,152

2,396
1,930

2,758
2,250

2,543
3,028

3,167
3,059

256
125
273
58
4,056
869
47
289
5,261

248
158
295
87
4,558
978
48
269
5,853

124
158
277
78
4,963
1,303
100
406
6,772

381
133
327
107
5,956
1,367
112
422
7,857

393
133
359
105
6,561
2,254
352
115
9,282

732
133
397
16
7,504
3,834
526
293
12,157

• Acquisitions and treatment of goodwill: Heineken has consistently used acquisitions for growth, generating more than €3.1 billion in goodwill over the last five
years. Before 2003, Heineken followed Dutch accounting policies that permitted the immediate write-off of goodwill. In 2003, these rules were changed,
and Heineken began capitalizing and amortizing goodwill. To estimate invested
capital with goodwill, we add back the cumulative goodwill written off.
• Results from nonconsolidated participating interests: Results from nonconsolidated participating interests represent Heineken’s share of income from companies that are not consolidated in its financial statements. Heineken reports
these on an after-tax basis. Therefore, when estimating NOPLAT, we do not adjust for taxes on this income.
• Revaluation reserves: Each year, Heineken makes an adjustment to its equity
called a “revaluation reserve.” Although the details of this adjustment are not
disclosed, it is most likely due to foreign-currency translation adjustments and

220

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 7.35 Heineken: Historical Cash Flow
€ million

Operating cash flows
NOPLAT
Depreciation
Gross cash flow

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

577
379
956

606
439
1,045

801
469
1,270

922
491
1,413

937
578
1,515

(Increase) decrease
in working capital
Capital expenditures
Gross investment

50

(97)

(156)

(225)

93

(703)
(653)

(665)
(762)

(752)
(908)

(1,094)
(1,319)

(1,609)
(1,516)

Free cash flow before goodwill
Investment in goodwill
Free cash flow after goodwill

303
(106)
197

283
(778)
(495)

362
(320)
42

93
(778)
(685)

0
(1,124)
(1,124)

After tax interest received
(Increase) decrease in
excess marketable securities
Results of nonconsolidated
participating interests
(Increase) decrease in nonconsolidated participating interests
Other nonoperating cash flows
Cash flow to investors

26
(245)

28
400

31
(333)

24
418

26
(633)

51

59

45

48

101

67

(90)

96

(229)

(21)

1
96

(68)
(166)

35
(84)

(83)
(506)

(270)
(1,921)

52
1
28
8
(109)
(1)

71
3
16
124
(325)
(52)

77
3
57
(257)
(64)
(12)

96
9
62
(12)
(887)
(240)

118
14
66
(339)
(1,580)
(174)

20

(137)

(16)

307

(178)

(28)

9

(29)

2

(5)

125
96

125
(166)

157
(84)

157
(506)

157
(1,921)

Financing flows
After tax interest paid
Interest on retirement liabilities
Minority interest (income statement)
(Increase) decrease in minority interest
(Increase) decrease in debt
(Increase) decrease
in retirement liabilities
(Increase) decrease
in restructuring provisions
(Increase) decrease
in dividends payable
Dividends
Total financing flows

fixed-asset revaluations. We have treated changes in these reserves as nonoperating cash flows.
• Dividends: Following changes in Dutch reporting standards in 2003, the yearend equity is reported inclusive of dividends declared but not yet paid. Before
2003, dividends were deducted from equity when declared and shown as a liability until paid to shareholders.

REORGANIZATION OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

221

Exhibit 7.36 Heineken: Historical Economic Profit
€ million, percent
Before goodwill
After-tax ROIC (on beginning of year invested capital)
WACC
Spread

1999
20.0%
8.7%
11.3%

2000
18.9%
8.3%
10.6%

2001
22.4%
8.4%
14.0%

2002
22.5%
7.7%
14.8%

2003
16.5%
7.7%
8.8%

Invested capital (beginning of year)
Economic profit

2,887
326

3,196
340

3,578
500

4,090
607

5,670
501

NOPLAT
Capital charge
Economic profit

577
(251)
326

606
(265)
340

801
(301)
500

922
(315)
607

937
(437)
501

After goodwill
After-tax ROIC (on beginning of year invested capital)
WACC
Spread

14.7%
8.7%
6.0%

13.9%
8.3%
5.6%

14.5%
8.4%
6.1%

14.5%
7.7%
6.8%

9.5%
7.7%
1.8%

Invested capital (beginning of year)
Economic profit

3,932
235

4,348
245

5,508
338

6,340
433

9,822
181

NOPLAT
Capital charge
Economic profit

577
(342)
235

606
(361)
245

801
(463)
338

922
(488)
433

937
(756)
181

• Taxes: The statutory tax rate in the Netherlands has been 35 percent in recent
years. That rate will be used to calculate the marginal taxes related to interest
income and expense.
• Excess cash: We have assumed that any cash and marketable securities above 2
percent of turnover are excess to the needs of the business operations. This assumption is approximately the minimum cash level we have historically observed for similar companies. Excess cash is treated as a nonoperating asset,
rather than as working capital.
• Other financial fixed assets: Other financial fixed assets are primarily loans to
customers and related parties.
• Pension plans: At the end of 2003, Heineken had an unfunded pension liability
of €526 million, primarily related to pensions and annuities that have not been
insured with third parties. Unlike U.S. companies, Heineken’s financial statements do not disclose the components of pension expense (the portion of expense that is related to interest expense or investment income), so we have
assumed a net interest expense at 4 percent of the liability is included in pension expense in operating costs. In estimating NOPLAT, we have reclassified
this amount from operating costs to interest expense. (We normally would not
adjust for such a small amount, but we do so here to illustrate the technique.)

222

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 7.37 Heineken: Historical Operating Ratios
percent
Operating ratios
Adjusted EBITA/net turnover
Raw materials, consumables
and services/net turnover
Marketing and selling
expenses/net turnover
Staff costs/net turnover
Depreciation1/net turnover
Return on invested capital (beginning)
Tangible fixed assets/net turnover
Working capital/net turnover
Net turnover/invested capital (times)
Pre-tax ROIC
Cash tax rate
After-tax ROIC
After-tax ROIC (including goodwill)

1999
13.5
46.9

2000
13.2
46.3

2001
13.9
45.9

2002
14.4
44.5

2003
13.8
48.2

15.6

15.8

16.1

17.6

12.2

18.4
12.0

18.5
12.7

17.9
12.6

18.2
11.8

19.8
11.3

48.1
4.6
2.1
28.9
30.9
20.0
14.7

46.3
3.3
2.2
28.9
34.5
18.9
13.9

45.4
4.1
2.2
30.9
27.5
22.4
14.5

45.9
5.4
2.2
31.7
28.9
22.5
14.5

54.62
7.7
1.9
26.3
26.4
19.42
11.92

Return on invested capital (average)
Average tangible fixed
assets/net turnover
Working capital/net turnover
Net turnover/invested capital
Pre-tax ROIC
After-tax ROIC
After-tax ROIC (including goodwill)

45.2

44.3

43.2

42.9

54.62

4.2
2.0
27.5
19.0
13.9

4.0
2.1
27.3
17.9
12.3

5.1
2.1
28.8
20.9
13.5

6.6
2.0
29.0
20.6
13.0

7.2
1.6
22.5
16.52
9.52

Growth rates
Revenue growth rate
Adjusted EBITA growth rate
NOPLAT growth rate
Invested capital growth rate
Net Income growth rate

13.0
24.7
38.6
10.7
16.1

13.8
10.8
4.9
12.0
20.3

13.2
19.4
32.3
14.3
23.5

13.5
17.3
15.0
18.4
3.7

2.7
(1.7)
1.7
17.1
0.4

Investment rates
Gross investment rate
Net investment rate

68.3
47.5

72.9
53.3

71.5
54.9

93.4
89.9

100.0
100.0

10.0
11.9
29.9
6.1
5.4

8.4
9.6
33.2
6.1
6.1

9.5
10.8
36.3
7.6
4.7

8.8
9.7
45.0
17.2
2.8

7.0
8.4
60.1
24.5
3.0

21.0

24.0

17.0

11.0

13.0

Financing
Coverage (adjusted EBITA/interest)
Cash coverage (gross CF/interest)
Debt/total book capitalization
Debt/total market capitalization
Market value of operating invested
capital/book value on invested capital
Market value of operating invested
capital/adjusted EBITA
1Depreciation excluding value adjustments.
2Ending invested capital used for calculations of ROIC.

REORGANIZATION OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

223

Exhibit 7.38 Heineken: Supporting Calculations
€ million

Change in working capital
Increase (decrease) in operating cash
Increase (decrease) in accounts receivable
Increase (decrease) in stocks
Increase (decrease) in other current assets
(Increase) in accounts payable
(Increase) decrease in tax payable
(Increase) decrease in other
current liabilities
Net change in working capital
Capital expenditures
Increase (decrease) in tangible
fixed assets
Depreciation
Exchange differences
Revaluation
Capital expenditures (net of disposals)
Investment in goodwill
Increase (decrease) in goodwill
Increase (decrease) in cumulative
goodwill written off and amortized
Investment in goodwill
Other nonoperating cash flows
Extraordinary items
(Increase) decrease in other
financial fixed assets
Nonoperating cash flows

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

14
78
38
49
(46)
(68)
(116)

17
112
60
9
(72)
1
(31)

18
127
142
41
(91)
(47)
(34)

21
81
73
(3)
(9)
13
49

5
139
69
(30)
(116)
(70)
(90)

(50)

97

156

225

(93)

359

286

355

528

920

379
0
(35)
703

439
0
(60)
665

469
0
(72)
752

491
107
(32)
1,094

578
152
(41)
1,609

0
106

0
778

0
320

0
778

1,093
31

106

778

320

778

1,124

0
1

0
(68)

52
(17)

0
(83)

0
(270)

1

(68)

35

(83)

(270)

• Deferred taxes: Heineken has €397 million in net deferred taxes, which we
have treated as an equity equivalent, adjusting NOPLAT for the change each
year and adding it to equity in the total investor funds reconciliation.
• Provisions: We have divided Heineken’s provisions—other than pensions and
deferred taxes—into restructuring provisions (related to specific plant closings
and layoffs) and other provisions (the general income-smoothing provisions that
European companies sometimes use), based on information from its footnotes.
Similar to deferred taxes, income-smoothing provisions are treated as equity
equivalents. Restructuring provisions are treated as a debt equivalent, meaning
they are not considered part of NOPLAT, and the change in their value is
treated like the change in debt in calculating investor funds and financing flows,
as explained earlier in this chapter.

224

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

INDUSTRY BACKGROUND
To provide a context for analyzing Heineken’s performance, we first outline the competitive landscape of the beer industry. The industry has long been fragmented, regional, and slow growing. Over the five years to 2003, worldwide beer consumption
grew 2.0 percent annually in volume terms. Volume is expected to increase by another
2.1 percent per year from 2004 to 2008, primarily from growth in emerging markets
(see Exhibit 7.39).
In the past few years, the beer industry has experienced a flurry of mergers and
acquisitions, though it remains fragmented. The top 3 brewers have a combined market
share of only 23 percent worldwide, and the top 20 brewers have a combined market
share of only 61 percent. This fragmentation is due in large part to regional oligopolies.
In the top 20 markets by size, the top two players have large market shares, with an
average combined market share of 68 percent. However, the leading players vary from
country to country (see Exhibit 7.40).
Even as the major brewers have expanded outside their home markets, competition has remained local. The main reasons include consumer preferences for local
brands and tastes, high government tariffs, regulations, and limited opportunities for
economies of scale or scope across national borders. As a result, when brewers have
entered new markets, they typically have focused on transferring skills, such as marketing, rather than building globally integrated businesses. The strength of local com-

Exhibit 7.39 Worldwide Beer Growth
Consumption
million hectaliters1

World
Africa and Middle East

1,444
67

Eastern Europe

190

South/Central America

219

1,602
72

273

13.6
3.0

Asia
Pacific
South/
Central
America

4
11

1.7

263

27
293

Western Europe

295

Asia Pacific2

411

479

2003

2008F

1
1 hectaliter=100 liters.
2

Percentage of absolute growth
2003–2008

2.1
3.7

241
244

North America

CAGR 2003–2008
(percent)

Includes Australasia.
Source: Canadean 2003 Global Beer Report.

North
America

(0.9)

11
17

6.4

Western
Europe

Africa
and
Middle
East

INDUSTRY BACKGROUND

225

Exhibit 7.40 Beer Industry: National Market Share
percent
Market region

Top players

Netherlands

Heineken
Interbrew
Grolsch

United Kingdom

United States

Belgium

France

China

Brazil

Market share
52
15
13
28

Scottish & Newcastle
Coors Brewers
Interbrew

20
17
47

Anheuser-Busch
Miller
Coors

19
10
55

Interbrew
Aiken-Maes

14
40
36

Kronenbourg
Heineken
Interbrew
Tsingtao
Yanjing
CRE/SAB
Ambev
Molson
Schincarol

10
10
7
5
68
15
10

Source: Canadean 2003 Global Beer Report.

petition has kept the pace of industry consolidation slow, as local brewers do not feel
the need to sell their businesses to the majors to remain competitive.
As tastes converge, technology improves, transportation costs decline, and brewers learn how to better leverage their expertise and brand names, the industry will
slowly begin to reach consumers on a global scale. For 6 of the top 10 breweries, at
least 20 percent of the volume growth since 1990 has come through acquisitions.
Brewers adopt two distinct strategies: They either specialize by focusing on a specific link in the value chain or become a geographic integrator. The specialization strategy involves focusing on product development, brewing, packaging, distribution, or
marketing, and then becoming the global leader in one or two of these tasks. Diageo’s
Guinness, for example, has focused on a product with a unique flavor supported by
aggressive global marketing. Boston Beer Company runs a “virtual” beer company in
which it controls product development and marketing but contracts out most production. Geographic integrators such as Heineken and Interbrew, in contrast, purchase underperforming breweries or breweries in developing countries and apply best practices
in brewing, distribution, and marketing.

226

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 7.41 Heineken: Revenue Growth Analysis
percent

Organic volume growth
Price increase/mix change
Underlying organic growth
Acquisitions (first time consolidations)
Currency changes
Accounting change/other
Revenue growth

2000
2.0
3.0
5.0
7.0
1.0
0.8
13.8

2001
1.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
2.0
0.2
13.2

2002
2.0
4.0
6.0
7.0
(1.0)
1.5
13.5

2003
1.5
3.5
5.0
8.0
(4.0)
(6.3)
2.7

CAGR 00–03
1.6
3.6
5.2
7.0
(0.5)
(1.0)
10.7

HEINEKEN’S GROWTH AND ROIC
To evaluate Heineken’s financial performance, we compared it with other large, publicly traded beer companies: Anheuser-Busch, SABMiller, Coors, and Interbrew (now
InBev after the merger with AmBev).
From 1999 through 2003, Heineken increased its revenues by 10.7 percent per year
(see Exhibit 7.41). However, organic growth (volume, price increase, and mix) has driven
only half of total revenue growth, about 5 percent per year. Acquisitions have added 7
percent per year. The remaining difference is due to currency effects and accounting
changes. In 2003, currency changes, primarily the decline in the U.S. dollar, reduced
Heineken’s revenues by 4 percent. In addition, Heineken changed its method of ac-

Exhibit 7.42 Beer Industry: Revenue Growth Analysis, 1999–2003
18
Compound annual growth rate, percent

Acquisitions, other
16

Organic

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Heineken AnheuserBusch

SAB
Miller

Coors

Interbrew

HEINEKEN’S GROWTH AND ROIC

227

counting for discounts provided to retailers and distributors. Beginning in 2003, turnover
(revenue) is shown net of discounts. This accounting change reduced turnover by 6.3
percent in 2003. Heineken does not disclose enough information to restate prior years.
This accounting change had no impact on profits, but margins appear to be higher (the
same profit divided by smaller turnover).
Exhibit 7.42 compares Heineken’s revenue growth with that of its peers. Overall
growth from 1999 to 2003 varies from 4.8 percent for Anheuser-Busch to 15.5 percent
for Coors. However, these results are not comparable due to acquisitions, accounting
changes, and currency effects. The distribution of organic growth was very narrow,
ranging from 4.8 percent to 6.1 percent, with Heineken right in the middle.
As all of the companies have similar organic growth rates, the most important driver
for explaining the differences in value across peers is ROIC. Heineken increased its ROIC
excluding goodwill from 19.4 percent in 1999 to 21.1 percent in 2002 (see Exhibit 7.43). Then ROIC fell in 2003 to 16.5 percent. The decline was largely due to the
weaker economics of the Austrian brewer BBAG, which Heineken acquired in 2003. In
addition, Heineken’s margins were hurt by competition in some markets and by lower
margins on beer exported from Europe to the United States, due to the weakening of the

Exhibit 7.43 Beer Industry: Value Drivers
percent
ROIC (including goodwill)
Heineken
Anheuser-Busch
SABMiller
Coors
Interbrew

1999
13.9
16.1
21.0
11.2
8.2

2000
12.3
17.2
27.5
12.0
8.7

2001
13.5
18.7
23.6
12.2
10.8

2002
13.0
21.1
18.1
12.5
9.7

2003
9.5
23.8
12.5
6.9
10.5

ROIC (excluding goodwill)
Heineken
Anheuser-Busch
SABMiller
Coors
Interbrew

19.0
16.9
24.7
11.6
13.3

17.9
18.0
35.6
12.5
14.6

20.9
19.6
36.0
13.0
19.0

20.6
22.1
34.3
21.3
18.8

16.5
24.9
36.6
13.9
22.1

Operating margin
Heineken
Anheuser-Busch
SABMiller
Coors
Interbrew

13.5
25.9
13.8
6.3
10.1

13.2
26.5
16.4
6.7
10.4

13.9
27.1
19.1
7.2
13.5

14.4
28.2
20.3
8.3
13.5

13.8
29.1
14.4
6.8
14.1

Capital turnover
Heineken
Anheuser-Busch
SABMiller
Coors
Interbrew

2.0
1.4
2.7
3.0
2.0

2.1
1.5
2.8
2.9
1.9

2.1
1.5
2.6
2.9
1.8

2.0
1.7
2.5
3.9
1.8

1.6
1.8
3.9
3.2
2.0

228

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

U.S. dollar. Heineken’s EBITA margin declined from 14.4 percent in 2002 to 13.8 percent in 2003. In addition, BBAG is more capital intensive. Heineken’s capital turnover,
which had been constant from 1999 to 2002 at 2.1 times, declined to 1.6 times in 2003.
(Remember that we used Heineken’s ending invested capital to calculate ROIC in 2003.)
We also estimated Heineken’s ROIC including goodwill to see the impact of acquisitions. Including goodwill reduces Heineken’s ROIC about four to six percentage
points in each of the last five years. In 2003, Heineken’s ROIC including goodwill was
9.6 percent versus 16.5 percent without goodwill.
Anheuser-Busch and SABMiller had the best underlying performance, with 2003
ROICs before goodwill of 24.9 percent and 36.6 percent, respectively. While Busch’s
high ROIC comes from strong margins, increasing from 25.9 percent in 1999 to 29.1
percent in 2003, SABMiller was the leader in invested capital turnover, increasing from
2.7 in 1999 to 3.9 in 2003. Exhibit 7.44 shows the breakdown of the capital turnover
for each company during 2003. Heineken’s low capital turnover has primarily resulted
from much higher working capital needs than those of its peers.
Although SABMiller has the highest ROIC excluding goodwill, the company is in
line with its peers when taking into account the effects of acquisitions at 12.5 percent
in 2003. Since Anheuser-Busch has primarily grown organically, its ROIC including
goodwill is roughly the same excluding goodwill at 23.8 percent. Coors has had slight
improvements in both margins and capital turnover over the last five years. Interbrew
has had constant turnover but has increased margins from 10.1 percent in 1999 to
14.1 percent in 2003. However, ROIC including goodwill has deteriorated for Coors
and has increased only slightly for Interbrew, going from 1999 levels of 11.2 percent
and 8.2 percent, respectively, to 6.9 percent and 10.5 percent, respectively, in 2003.

PERFORMANCE IN THE STOCK MARKET
As a final assessment of historical performance, we compared the stock market performance of these companies, using two indicators: TRS and the ratio of market value to
invested capital. In terms of TRS, Heineken has struggled during the last five years. It
is the only company out of its peers to have negative TRS when measured over the
one, three, and five years to 2003 (see Exhibit 7.45). Over that period, Heineken’s

Exhibit 7.44 Beer Industry: Capital Turnover Analysis, 2003
percent

Company
Heineken
Anheuser-Busch
SABMiller
Coors
Interbrew

Working capital/
revenue
7.2
(2.0)
(2.4)
2.2
0.1

Net PPE/
revenue
54.6
59.5
29.2
34.9
48.7

Other
assets/
revenue
0.0
(1.7)
(1.0)
(5.7)
0.9

Goodwill/
revenue
11.8
2.5
49.8
31.8
55.1

Capital
turnover
excluding
goodwill
1.6
1.8
3.9
3.2
2.0

Capital
turnover
including
goodwill
1.4
1.7
1.3
1.6
1.0

PERFORMANCE IN THE STOCK MARKET

229

shareholder returns have averaged −5 percent per year, much lower than for AnheuserBusch, at 12 percent, and SABMiller, at 11 percent. (These percentages are based on
local currencies, not in a common currency. We tested total returns in U.S. dollars and
found the relative performance to be the same.) The market set high standards for
Heineken. Unfortunately, Heineken has been unable to keep pace with expectations.
We also compared Heineken’s market-value-to-invested-capital ratio with that of
its peers. Market-value-to-invested-capital compares the company’s market value
(both debt and equity) to the amount of capital that has been invested in the company
(fixed assets, working capital, and investments in intangibles from acquisitions); it
measures the market ’s perception of the company’s ability to create wealth.
Heineken’s value places it in line with its peers at a market-value-to-invested-capital
ratio of 1.6. This means that the market assigns a value of $1.60 for every dollar invested in the company. Anheuser-Busch was the only company that truly stood out
from its peers, with a market-value-to-invested-capital ratio of 6.1. Busch’s high value
to invested capital including goodwill is primarily driven by a greater ROIC including
goodwill: 23.8 percent in 2003 versus its peer average of 12.9 percent.

Exhibit 7.45 Beer Industry: Stock Market Performance
Period ended December 31, 2003
5–year
average TRS

3–year
average TRS

1–year
average TRS

(5.3)

(15.5)

(17.8)

Heineken
Anheuser-Busch

11.7

SABMiller

10.8

11.7

10.6

6.7

51.3

Coors

1.3

(10.0)

(7.0)

Interbrew1

n/a

8.4

(4.1)

SABMiller

Budweiser

December 2003

5-year average TRS

15
10
5
Coors
0
–5

2

4

6

8

Heineken

–10
Market-value-to-invested-capital
1

Has not been traded for 5 years.

230

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 7.46 Beer Industry: Value Multiples
Excluding goodwill
Heineken
Anheuser-Busch
SABMiller
Coors
Interbrew

Value/invested
capital
2.8
6.4
4.5
2.8
4.0

Operating
value/EBITA
12.1
15.7
11.0
12.3
13.7

2003 ROIC
(percent)
16.5
24.8
36.6
13.9
22.1

1999–2003 ROIC
(percent)
19.0
20.3
33.5
14.5
17.6

Including goodwill
Heineken
Anheuser-Busch
SABMiller
Coors
Interbrew

1.6
6.1
1.5
1.4
1.2

12.1
15.7
11.0
12.3
13.7

9.5
23.8
12.5
6.9
10.5

12.5
19.4
20.5
11.0
9.6

The matrix on the bottom of Exhibit 7.45 shows TRS and market-value-to-investedcapital simultaneously. Heineken is valued in line with Coors and SABMiller, but the
market historically had high expectations for Heineken, so its TRS is lower. AnheuserBusch had high value to invested capital as well as high TRS. Anheuser-Busch positively surprised the market during this period.
Heineken is valued at 12.1 times EBITA, in line with SABMiller, Coors, and Interbrew but below Anheuser-Busch at 15.7 times (see Exhibit 7.46). As the exhibit shows,
all the peers have similar organic growth, so it is no surprise that differences in ROIC
(without goodwill) drive the differences in earnings multiples.

LIQUIDITY, LEVERAGE, AND FINANCIAL HEALTH
Heineken’s debt increased significantly in 2003, due to acquisitions. Despite the
higher debt, interest coverage in 2003 was 7.2 times, a strong investment-grade level
and also in line with peers (see Exhibit 7.47). Heineken retains significant financial
flexibility for additional acquisitions or to weather difficult periods.

Exhibit 7.47 Beer Industry: Credit Ratios

Company
Heineken
Anheuser-Busch
SABMiller
Coors
Interbrew

Adjusted
EBITA
$ million
1,605
3,201
1,198
272
996

Interest
expense
$ million
227
376
163
70
131

Adjusted
EBITA/
interest
expense
7.1
8.5
7.3
4.0
8.0

Gross cash
flow/
interest
expense
8.4
2.8
6.9
6.0
10.0

Debt to MV
of investor
funds (percent)
24.5
14.5
33.8
33.9
21.2

REVIEW QUESTIONS

231

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Why is it important to convert the balance sheet and income statement
to reflect economic performance versus accounting performance?
2. Identify and explain the key steps to restate the company’s balance
sheet and income statement.
3. How do operating assets differ from nonoperating assets? How do
operating assets differ from invested capital? Why is this differentiation important?
4. How does a manager adjust the income statement to compute
NOPLAT? Why are the adjustments important?
5. Explain how net income differs from free cash flow. Why is the difference important when valuing a corporation?
6. Define ROIC. How does ROIC differ from ROA or ROI? Explain the
process and importance of decomposing the ROIC ratio.
7. How does a corporation’s choice of pension plan (defined contribution versus defined benefit) impact the computation of ROIC? What
additional factors must be evaluated when computing invested capital, NOPLAT, and ROIC?
8. When should goodwill be included in the computation of ROIC?
Historical Balance Sheet for MKM, Inc.
$ millions
Cash

2003

2004

5

10

Marketable securities

155

107

Inventory

250

300

Current assets

410

417

Property, plant, and equipment

400

500

Equity investments at cost

100

75

Total assets

910

992

Accounts payable

200

210

Current portion of long-term debt

20

20

Current liabilities

220

230

Long-term debt

200

200

Equity

100

100

Retained earnings

390

462

Total liabilities and shareholder equity

910

992

232

ANALYZING HISTORICAL PERFORMANCE

Historical Income Statement for MKM, Inc.
$ millions

2003

2004

Revenue

810

880

Operating expenses

-600

-640

Depreciation

-80

-90

Operating profit

130

150

Interest income

5

5

Interest expense

-10

-10

Loss on equity investment

0

-25

Earnings before taxes

125

120

Taxes

-50

-48

Net income

75

72

9. Assuming the marginal tax rate equals 40 percent, compute MKM’s
EBITDA, NOPLAT, Invested Capital, and ROIC (for simplicity, use
year-end invested capital). Is ROIC increasing or decreasing?
10. Decompose MKM’s ROIC and explain how each component of the
decomposition leads to an integrated perspective of performance.
Address whether operating margins or capital turnover is driving
the drop in ROIC.
11. Develop an economic profit statement for MKM. Assume an 11.1
percent weighted average cost of capital. Interpret the results from
year to year.
12. Compute MKM’s free cash flow in 2004. How can the company have
negative free cash flow, even though it is creating value?
13. Compute MKM’s interest coverage ratio. Is the interest coverage
ratio improving?

8
Forecasting Performance
In Chapter 6 we focused on how to forecast long-run value drivers that are
consistent with economic theory and historical evidence. In this chapter
we focus on the mechanics of forecasting—specifically, how to develop an
integrated set of financial forecasts that reflect the company’s expected
performance.
Although the future is unknowable, careful analysis can yield insights
into how a company may develop. This chapter shows how to build a
well-structured spreadsheet model: one that separates raw inputs from
computations, flows from one worksheet to the next, and is flexible
enough to handle multiple scenarios. Next we discuss the process of forecasting. To arrive at future cash flow, we forecast the income statement,
balance sheet, and statement of retained earnings. The forecasted financial statements provide the information we need for computing ROIC and
free cash flow.
While you are building a forecast, it is easy to become engrossed in the
details of individual line items. But we stress, once again, that you must
place your aggregate results in the proper context. You can do much more to
improve your valuation by matching future ROIC against a company’s competitive advantage than by precisely ( but perhaps inaccurately) forecasting
accounts receivable 10 years out. For this reason, we start by discussing the
proper length and detail of a forecast.

DETERMINE LENGTH AND DETAIL OF THE FORECAST
Before you begin forecasting individual line items, you must determine
how many years to forecast and how detailed your forecast should be. The
typical solution, described in Chapter 5, is to develop an explicit forecast for
233

234

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

a number of years and then to value the remaining years by using a formula, such as the key value driver formula introduced in Chapter 3. But
whatever formula you choose, all the continuing-value approaches assume
steady-state performance. Thus, the explicit forecast period must be long
enough for the company to reach a steady state, defined by the following
characteristics:
• The company grows at a constant rate and reinvests a constant proportion of its operating profits into the business each year.
• The company earns a constant rate of return on new capital invested.
• The company earns a constant return on its base level of invested capital.
As a result, free cash flow will grow at a constant rate and can be valued
using a growth perpetuity. The explicit forecast period should be long
enough that the company’s growth rate is less than or equal to that of the
economy. Higher growth rates would eventually make companies unrealistically large, relative to the aggregate economy.
In general, we recommend using a forecast period of 10 to 15 years—
perhaps longer for cyclical companies or those experiencing very rapid
growth. Using a short explicit forecast period, such as five years, typically
results in a significant undervaluation of a company or requires heroic longterm growth assumptions in the continuing value. Even so, a long forecast
period raises its own issues, namely the difficulty of forecasting individual
line items 10 to 15 years into the future. To simplify the model and avoid the
error of false precision, we often split the explicit forecast into two periods:
1. A detailed five- to seven-year forecast, which develops complete balance sheets and income statements with as many links to real variables (e.g., unit volumes, cost per unit) as possible
2. A simplified forecast for the remaining years, focusing on a few important variables, such as revenue growth, margins, and capital turnover
This approach not only simplifies the forecast, it also forces you to focus on
the business’s long-term economics, rather than the individual line items of
the forecast. The Heineken case at the end of the chapter demonstrates how
this works.

COMPONENTS OF A GOOD MODEL
If you combine 15 years of financial forecasts with 10 years of historical
analysis, any valuation spreadsheet becomes complex. Therefore, you need

COMPONENTS OF A GOOD MODEL

235

Exhibit 8.1 Sample Excel Workbook
Data generally
flows in one
direction

to design and structure your model before starting to forecast. Many designs are possible. In our example (see Exhibit 8.1), the Excel workbook contains seven worksheets:
1. Raw historical data: Collect raw data from the company’s financial
statements, footnotes, and external reports in one place. Report the
raw data in its original form.
2. Integrated financial statements: Using figures from the raw-data worksheet, create a set of historical financials that find the right level of
detail. The income statement should be linked with the balance sheet
through retained earnings. This worksheet will contain historical
and forecasted financial statements.
3. Historical analysis and forecast ratios: For each line item in the financial
statements, build historical ratios, as well as forecasts of future ratios. These ratios will generate the forecasted financial statements
contained on the previous sheet.

236

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

4. Market data and WACC: Collect all financial market data on one worksheet. This worksheet will contain estimates of beta, the cost of equity, the cost of debt, and the weighted average cost of capital, as
well as historical market values and valuation/trading multiples for
the company.
5. Reorganized financial statements: Once a complete set of financial statements ( both historical and forecasted) are built, reorganize the financial statements to calculate NOPLAT, its reconciliation to net income,
invested capital, and its reconciliation to total funds invested.
6. ROIC and free cash f low: Use the reorganized financials to build return on invested capital, economic profit, and free cash flow. Future
free cash flow will be the basis of your valuation.
7. Valuation summary: This worksheet presents discounted cash flows,
discounted economic profits, and final results. The valuation summary includes the value of operations, nonoperating asset valuations, valuation of nonequity claims, and the resulting equity value.
Well-built valuation models have certain characteristics. First, original
data and user input are collected in only a few places. For instance, we limit
original data and user input to just three worksheets: raw data (worksheet
1), forecasts (worksheet 3), and market data (worksheet 4). To provide additional clarity, denote raw data or user input in a different color. Second,
whenever possible, a given worksheet should feed into the next worksheet.
Formulas should not bounce from sheet to sheet without clear direction.
Raw data should feed into integrated financials, which, in turn, should feed
into ROIC and free cash flow. Finally, unless specified as data input, numbers should never be hard-coded into a formula. Hard-coded numbers are
easily lost as the spreadsheet grows in complexity.

MECHANICS OF FORECASTING
The enterprise DCF relies on forecasted free cash flow. But as noted at the
beginning of this chapter, free cash flow forecasts should be created indirectly by first forecasting the income statement, balance sheet, and statement of retained earnings. Compute forecasted free cash flow in the same
way as when analyzing historical performance. (A well-built spreadsheet
will use the same formulas for historical and forecasted periods without
any modification.)
We can break the forecasting process into six steps:
1. Prepare and analyze historical financials. Before forecasting future financials, you must build and analyze historical financials.

MECHANICS OF FORECASTING

237

2. Build the revenue forecast. Almost every line item will rely directly or indirectly on revenue. You can estimate future revenue by using either a
top-down (market-based) or bottom-up (customer-based) approach.
Forecasts should be consistent with historical economy-wide evidence on growth.
3. Forecast the income statement. Use the appropriate economic drivers to
forecast operating expenses, depreciation, interest income, interest
expense, and reported taxes.
4. Forecast the balance sheet: invested capital and nonoperating assets. On the
balance sheet, forecast operating working capital; net property, plant,
and equipment; goodwill; and nonoperating assets.
5. Forecast the balance sheet: investor funds. Complete the balance sheet by
computing retained earnings and forecasting other equity accounts.
Use excess cash and/or new debt to balance the balance sheet.
6. Calculate ROIC and FCF. Calculate ROIC to assure forecasts are consistent with economic principles, industry dynamics, and the company’s ability to compete. To complete the forecast, calculate free
cash flow as the basis for valuation. Future FCF should be calculated
the same way as historical FCF.
Give extra emphasis to forecasting revenue. Almost every line item in
the spreadsheet will be either directly or indirectly driven by revenues, so
you should devote enough time to arrive at a good revenue forecast, especially for rapidly growing businesses.

Step 1: Prepare and Analyze Historical Financials
Before you start building a forecast, you must input the company’s historical
financials into a spreadsheet program. To do this, you can rely on data from
a professional service, such as Standard & Poor’s Compustat, or you can use
financials directly from the company’s filings. Professional services offer
the benefit of standardized data (i.e., financial data formatted into a set
number of categories). Since data items do not change across companies, a
single model can analyze any company. However, using a standardized data
set carries a significant cost. Many of the specified categories aggregate important items, hiding critical information. For instance, Compustat groups
“advances to sales staff ” (an operating asset) and “pension and other special
funds” (a nonoperating asset) into a single category titled “other assets.” Because of this, models based solely on preformatted data can lead to significant errors in the estimation of value drivers, and hence to poor valuations.
Alternatively, you can build a model using financials from the company’s
annual report. To use raw data, however, you must dig. Often, companies

238

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 8.2 Boeing: Current Liabilities in Balance Sheet
$ million
Balance sheet
Accounts payable and other liabilities
Advances in excess of related costs
Income taxes payable
Short-term debt and current portion of long-term debt
Current liabilities

2002
13,739
3,123
1,134
1,814
19,810

2003
13,563
3,464
277
1,144
18,448

From note 12–Accounts payable and other liabilities:
Accounts payable
Accrued compensation and employee benefit costs
Pension liabilities
Product warranty liabilities
Lease and other deposits
Dividends payable
Other
Accounts payable and other liabilities

4,431
2,876
1,177
898
280
143
3,934
13,739

3,822
2,930
1,138
825
316
143
4,389
13,563

Source: Boeing 10-K, 2003.

aggregate critical information to simplify their financial statements. Consider, for instance, the financials for Boeing presented in Exhibit 8.2. On
Boeing’s reported balance sheet, the company consolidates many items into
the account titled “accounts payable and other liabilities.” In the notes to
the balance sheet, note 12 details this line item. Some of the components
(such as accounts payable), are operating liabilities, and others (such as dividends payable) are nonoperating.
We prefer to collect raw data on a separate worksheet. On the raw-data
sheet, record financial data as originally reported, and never combine multiple data into a single cell. Once you have collected raw data from the
reported financials and notes, use the data to build a set of financial statements: the income statement, balance sheet, and statement of retained earnings. Although the statement of retained earnings appears redundant, it
will be critical for error checking during the forecasting process, because it
connects the income statement to the balance sheet.
As you build the integrated financials, you must decide whether to aggregate immaterial line items. Analyzing and forecasting numerous immaterial items can lead to confusion, introduce mistakes, and cause the
model to become unwieldy. Returning to the Boeing example presented in
Exhibit 8.2, “lease and other deposits” are well under 1 percent of Boeing’s revenue. Therefore, the valuation model can be simplified by combining this account with other (operating) liabilities. When aggregating,
make sure never to combine operating and nonoperating items into a sin-

MECHANICS OF FORECASTING

239

gle category. If the two accounts are combined, you cannot calculate ROIC
and FCF properly.

Step 2: Build the Revenue Forecast
To build a revenue forecast, you can use a top-down forecast, in which you
estimate revenues by sizing the total market, determining market share,
and forecasting prices. Or with the bottom-up approach, use the company’s
own forecasts of demand from existing customers, customer turnover, and
the potential for new customers. When possible, use both methods to establish bounds for the forecast.
The top-down approach can be applied to any company. For companies
in mature industries, the aggregate market grows slowly and is closely tied
to economic growth and other long-term trends, such as changing consumer preferences. In these situations, you can rely on professional forecasts of the aggregate market and instead focus on market share by
competitor.1 To do this, you must determine which companies have the capabilities and resources to compete effectively and capture share. A good
place to start, of course, is with historical financial analysis. But more importantly, make sure to address how the company is positioned for the future. Does it have the required products and services to capture share? Do
other competitors have products and services that will displace your company’s market position? A good forecast will address each of these issues.
Over the short-term, top-down forecasts should build on the company’s
announced intentions and capabilities for growth. For instance, retailers
like Wal-Mart have well-mapped plans for new store openings, which is
their primary driver of revenue growth. Oil companies like BP have proven
reserves and relatively fixed amounts of refining capacity. And pharmaceutical companies like Merck have a fixed set of drugs under patent and in
clinical trials.
In emerging-product markets, the top-down approach is especially
helpful but often requires more work than for established markets. For instance, consider the recent launch of the digital video recorder (DVR).
Given its lack of history, how do you estimate the potential size and speed
of penetration for companies in the DVR market? You could start by sizing
the current (or peak) VCR market. Analyze whether DVRs, given their
greater ease of use, will incur even greater adoption. Next, forecast how
quickly DVRs will penetrate households. To do this, look at the speed of
penetration for other household electronics, such as the CD player or the
1
For the automobile industry, for instance, Datamonitor publishes the Automobile Manufacturers Global Industry Guide. The report includes a five-year forecast of aggregate unit volume by
geographic region.

240

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

DVD player. It is necessary to determine the characteristics that drive penetration speeds in each of these markets and how the DVR compares with
these characteristics. Finally, what price (and margin) do you expect from
the DVR? How many companies are developing the product, and how competitive will the market be? As you can see, there are more questions than
answers. The key is structuring the analysis and applying historical evidence from comparable markets whenever possible.
Whereas a top-down approach starts with the aggregate market and predicts penetration rates, price changes, and market shares, a bottom-up approach relies on projections of customer demand. In some industries,
customers have projected their own revenue forecasts and will give suppliers
a rough estimate of their own purchase projections. By aggregating across
customers, you can determine short-term forecasts of revenue from the current customer base. Next, estimate the rate of customer turnover. If customer
turnover is significant, you have to eliminate a portion of estimated revenues.
As a final step, project how many new customers the company will attract and
how much revenue those customers will contribute. The resulting bottom-up
forecast combines new customers with revenues from existing customers.
Regardless of the method, forecasting revenues over long time periods
is imprecise. Customer preferences, technologies, and corporate strategies
change. These often unpredictable changes can profoundly influence the
winners and losers in the marketplace. Therefore, you must constantly
reevaluate whether the current forecast is consistent with industry dynamics, competitive positioning, and the historical evidence on corporate
growth. If you lack confidence in your revenue forecast, use multiple scenarios to model uncertainty. Doing this will not only bound the forecast,
but will also help company management make better decisions.

Step 3: Forecast the Income Statement
With a revenue forecast in place, next forecast individual line items related
to the income statement. To forecast a line item, use a three-step process:
1. Decide what economically drives the line item. For most line items, forecasts will be tied directly to revenue. Some line items will be economically tied to a specific asset (or liability). For instance, interest
income is usually generated by liquid securities; if this is the case,
forecasts of interest income should be tied to liquid securities.
2. Estimate the forecast ratio. For each line item on the income statement,
compute historical values for each ratio, followed by estimates for
each of the forecast periods. To get the model working properly, initially set the forecast ratio equal to the previous year’s value. Once
the entire model is complete, return to the forecast page, and input
your best estimates.

MECHANICS OF FORECASTING

241

3. Multiply the forecast ratio by an estimate of its driver. Since most line
items are driven by revenue, most forecast ratios, such as COGS to
revenue, should be applied to estimates of future revenue. This is
why a good revenue forecast is critical. Any error in the revenue forecast will be carried through the entire model. Other ratios should be
multiplied by their respective drivers.
Exhibit 8.3 presents the historical income statement and partially completed forecast for a hypothetical company. To demonstrate the three-step
process, we forecast cost of goods sold. In the first step, we calculate historical COGS as a function of revenue. Then we compute the historical ratio of
COGS to revenue, which equals 37.5 percent. For simplicity, we initially set
next year’s ratio equal to 37.5 percent as well. Finally, we multiply the forecasted ratio by an estimate of next year’s revenue: 37.5 percent × $288 million = $108 million.
Note that we did not forecast COGS by increasing the account by 20 percent (the same growth rate as revenue). Although this process leads to the
same initial answer, it dramatically reduces flexibility. Because we used a
forecast ratio, we can either vary estimates of revenue (and COGS will
change in step) or vary the forecast ratio (for instance, to value a potential
improvement). If we had increased the COGS directly, however, we could
only vary the growth rate.

Exhibit 8.3 Partial Forecast of the Income Statement
Forecast worksheet
percent
Revenue growth
Cost of goods sold/revenues
Selling, general and admin/revenues
Depreciation/net property,
plant and equipment

2004
20.0
37.5
18.8
7.9

2005E
20.0
37.5

Step 1: Choose
a forecast
driver and
compute
historical
ratios.
Step 2: Estimate
the forecast ratio.

Income statement
$ million
2004
Revenues
240.0
Cost of goods sold
(90.0)
Selling, general and admin
(45.0)
Depreciation
(19.0)
EBIT
86.0
Interest expense
Interest income
Nonoperating income
Earnings before taxes (EBT)

(23.0)
5.0
4.0
72.0

Taxes on EBT
Net income

(24.0)
48.0

2005E
288.0
(108.0)

Step 3: Multiply the forecast ratio
by next year's estimate of revenues
(or applicable forecast driver).

242

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 8.4 Typical Forecast Drivers for the Income Statement

Operating

Nonoperating

Line item
Cost of goods sold (COGS)
Selling, general, and
administrative (SG&A)
Depreciation

Recommended
forecast driver
Revenue
Revenue

Recommended
forecast ratio
COGS/revenue
SG&A/revenue

Prior year net property,
Depreciation/net PP&E
plant, and equipment (PP&E)

Nonoperating income

Appropriate nonoperating
asset, if any

Interest expense
Interest income

Prior year total debt
Prior year excess cash

Nonoperating income/
nonoperating asset or growth
in nonoperating income
Interest expense (t)/total debt (t-1)
Interest income (t)/excess cash (t-1)

Exhibit 8.4 presents typical forecast drivers and forecast ratios for the
most common financial statement line items. The appropriate choice for a
forecast driver, however, depends on the company and the industry in
which it competes.

Operating expenses For each operating expense on the income statement—such as cost of goods sold; selling, general, and administrative; and
research and development—we recommend generating forecasts based on
revenue. In most cases, the process for operating expenses is straightforward. However, as we outlined in Chapter 7, accountants sometimes include
certain nonoperating items in operating expenses. As done in proper historical analysis, estimate forecast ratios excluding nonoperating items. For
instance, companies with defined-benefit plans will include expected returns from pension assets as part of COGS. In extreme cases, changes in
pension accounts can significantly distort historical COGS-to-revenue ratios. When this occurs, recalculate the historical COGS-to-revenue ratios
excluding the effects of pensions.
Depreciation To forecast depreciation, you have three options. You can
forecast depreciation as a percentage of revenue or as a percentage of property, plant, and equipment. If you are working inside the company, you can
also generate depreciation forecasts based on equipment purchases and depreciation schedules.
If capital expenditures are smooth, the choice between the first two
methods won’t matter. But if capital expenditures are lumpy, you will get
better forecasts if you use PP&E as the forecast driver. To see this, consider
a company that makes a large capital expenditure every few years. Since depreciation is directly tied to a particular asset, it should increase only following an expenditure. If you tie depreciation to sales, it will incorrectly
grow as revenues grow, even when expenditures haven’t been made.

MECHANICS OF FORECASTING

243

Exhibit 8.5 Completed Forecast of the Income Statement
Forecast worksheet
percent
Revenue growth
Cost of goods sold/revenue
Selling, general and admin/revenue
Depreciation/revenue
EBIT/revenue

2004
20.0
37.5
18.8
7.9
35.8

2005E
20.0
37.5
18.8
7.9
35.8

Nonoperating items
Nonoperating income growth

33.3

33.3

Interest rates
Interest expense
Interest income

7.6
5.0

7.6
5.0

Taxes
Operating tax rate
Marginal tax rate
Average tax rate

34.4
40.0
33.3

Income statement
$ million
2004
Revenues
240.0
Cost of goods sold
(90.0)
Selling, general and admin
(45.0)
Depreciation
(19.0)
EBIT
86.0

2005E
288.0
(108.0)
(54.0)
(22.8)
103.2

Interest expense
Interest income
Nonoperating income
Earnings before taxes (EBT)

(23.0)
5.0
4.0
72.0

(22.2)
3.0
5.3
89.4

Taxes on EBT

(24.0)

(30.0)

Net income

48.0

59.4

34.4
40.0
33.6

When using PP&E as the forecast driver, tie depreciation to net PP&E,
rather than gross PP&E. Ideally, depreciation would be tied to gross PP&E.
Otherwise, a company that purchases only one asset would see an annual
drop in depreciation as the asset depreciates (the ratio of depreciation to net
PP&E is fixed, not the dollar amount). But tying depreciation to gross PP&E
requires forecasting asset retirements. Specifically, when assets are fully
depreciated, they must be removed from gross PP&E, or else you will overestimate depreciation (and its tax shield) in the outer years.
If you have access to detailed, internal information about the company’s
assets, you can build formal depreciation tables. For each asset, project depreciation using an appropriate depreciation schedule, asset life, and salvage value. To determine companywide depreciation, combine the annual
depreciation of each asset.
In Exhibit 8.5, we present a forecast of depreciation, as well as the remaining line items on the income statement. In this example, we assume
capital expenditures are smooth. Therefore, we forecast depreciation as a
percentage of sales.

Nonoperating income Nonoperating income is generated by nonoperating assets, such as customer financing, nonconsolidated subsidiaries, and
other equity investments.2 For nonconsolidated subsidiaries and other
2

See Chapter 11 for additional information on the accounting treat ment and valuation of nonoperating assets.

244

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

equity investments, the forecast methodology depends on how much information is reported. For investments in which the parent company owns
less than 20 percent, the company records only dividends received and
asset sales. The nonoperating asset is recorded at cost, which remains unchanged until sold. For these investments, you cannot use traditional drivers to forecast cash flows; instead, estimate future nonoperating income
by examining historical growth in nonoperating income or by examining
the revenue and profit forecasts of publicly traded comparables (comparable to the equity investment).
For nonconsolidated subsidiaries with greater than 20 percent ownership, the parent company records income even when it is not paid out. Also,
the recorded asset grows as the investment’s retained earnings grow. Thus,
you can estimate future income from the nonconsolidated investment
either by forecasting a nonoperating income growth rate or by forecasting
return on equity (nonoperating income as a percentage of the appropriate
nonoperating asset) based on industry dynamics and the competitive position of the subsidiary.

Interest expense and interest income Interest expense (income) should
be tied directly to the liability (asset) that generates the expense (income).
The appropriate driver for interest expense is total debt. Total debt, however, is a function of interest expense, and this circularity leads to implementation problems. To see this, consider a rise in operating costs. If the
company uses debt to fund short-term needs, total debt will rise to cover
the financing gap caused by lower profits. This increased debt load will
cause interest expense to rise, dropping profits even further. Lower profits, once again, requires more debt. To avoid the complexity of this feedback effect, compute interest expense as a function of the previous year’s
debt load. This shortcut will simplify the model and lead to minimal estimation error.3
To forecast interest expense using the prior year’s debt, we need the historical income statement (see Exhibit 8.5) and balance sheet (see Exhibit 8.6)
of our hypothetical company. To estimate future interest expense, start
with 2004 interest expense ($23 million), and divide by 2003’s total debt
($304 million, found by aggregating short-term debt of $224 million plus
long-term debt of $80 million). This ratio equals 7.6 percent. To estimate
2005 interest expense, multiply the estimated forecast ratio (7.6 percent) by
2004 total debt ($293 million), which leads to a forecast of $22.2 million.
Note how interest expense is falling, even while revenue rises, because total
debt is shrinking. Thus, net income can change as a percentage of revenue,
even when forecast ratios are constant.
3

If you are using last year’s debt multiplied by current interest rates to forecast interest expense, the forecast error will be greatest when year-to-year changes in debt are significant.

MECHANICS OF FORECASTING

245

Exhibit 8.6 Historical Balance Sheet
$ million
Assets
Cash
Excess cash
Inventory
Current assets

2003
5.0
100.0
35.0
140.0

2004
5.0
60.0
45.0
110.0

Net property, plant, and equipment
Equity investments
Total assets

200.0
100.0
440.0

250.0
100.0
460.0

Liabilities and equity
2003
Accounts payable
15.0
Short-term debt
224.0
Current liabilities
239.0

2004
20.0
213.0
233.0

Long-term debt
Common stock
Retained earnings
Total liabilities and equity

80.0
65.0
82.0
460.0

80.0
65.0
56.0
440.0

Using historical interest rates to forecast interest expense is a simple,
straightforward estimation method. And since interest expense is not part
of free cash flow, the choice of how to forecast interest expense will not affect the company’s valuation (the cost of debt is modeled as part of the
weighted average cost of capital). When a company’s financial structure is
a critical part of the forecast, however, split debt (and interest expense)
into two categories, existing debt and new debt. Until repaid, existing
debt should generate interest expense consistent with historical rates. Interest expense based on new debt, in contrast, should be paid at current
market rates. Unless management specifically projects particular maturities, assume the company will raise 10-year bonds. Thus, projected interest expense should be calculated using the 10-year yield to maturity for
comparably rated debt.
Estimate interest income the same way, with forecasts based on the
asset generating the income. Be careful: interest income can be generated by
a number of different investments, including excess cash, short-term investments, customer financing, and other long-term investments. If a footnote
details the historical relation between interest income and the assets that
generate the income (and the relation is material), develop a separate calculation for each asset.

Taxes In a simple model, you can estimate reported taxes as a percentage of
earnings before taxes. When the company’s average tax rate does not equal its
marginal tax rate, as is the case for most companies, you need a more complicated forecasting approach.4 Otherwise, ROIC and free cash flow in forecast
years will inadvertently change as leverage and nonoperating income change.
Therefore, base free cash flow forecasts on the operating tax rate, not on the
4

To compute the average tax rate, divide taxes by earnings before taxes. The marginal tax rate
equals the tax rate on the next dollar of income.

246

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

average tax rate. As described in Chapter 7, calculate the historical operating
tax rate as follows:
Operating Tax Rate =

where

Reported Taxes + ∑ Tm (NOE) − ∑ Tm ( NOI )
EBITA

Tm = Marginal tax rate by nonoperating item
NOE = Nonoperating expense, such as interest expense
NOI = Nonoperating income, such as income from liquid securities

Exhibit 8.7 calculates operating taxes (for 2003 and 2004) for our sample
company. In 2004, reported taxes equal $24.0 million and operating taxes
equal $29.6 million. Dividing operating taxes by EBITA gives us the operating tax rate, which in 2004 is 34.4 percent.
Next, to forecast reported taxes, proceed in two steps. First, estimate operating taxes going forward: multiply the forecasted operating tax rate by
the forecast of EBITA (in our example, we assume the operating tax rate will
remain constant). Next, to determine reported taxes, subtract the projected
interest tax shield (interest times the marginal tax rate), and add any marginal taxes on nonoperating income. You now have a forecast of both operating and reported taxes, calculated such that future values of FCF and ROIC
will not change with leverage.
For our sample company, the operating tax rate differs from the marginal tax rate. Often this occurs because of special tax credits that are
granted for certain investments. If you use historical tax rates to forecast
future tax rates, you implicitly assume that these special incentives will
grow in line with EBITA. If this is not the case, EBITA should be taxed at the
marginal rate, and tax credits should be forecast one by one.

Exhibit 8.7 Forecast of Reported Taxes
$ million
Reported taxes
Taxes on interest expense
Taxes on interest income
Taxes on nonoperating income
Operating taxes

2003
17.0
6.8
(1.2)
(1.2)
21.4

2004
24.0
9.2
(2.0)
(1.6)
29.6

2005E
30.0
8.9
(1.2)
(2.1)
35.5

Forecast driver
EBITA
Operating tax rate (percent)
Operating taxes

64.0
33.4
21.4

86.0
34.4
29.6

103.2
34.4
35.5

Forecast operating taxes
first and work backwards
to estimate reported taxes

MECHANICS OF FORECASTING

247

Step 4: Forecast the Balance Sheet: Invested Capital and
Nonoperating Assets
To forecast the balance sheet, we first forecast invested capital and nonoperating assets. We do not, however, forecast excess cash or sources of financing (such as debt and equity). Excess cash and sources of financing require
special treatment and will be handled in Step 5.
When you forecast the balance sheet, one of the first issues you face is
whether to forecast the line items in the balance sheet directly (in stocks) or
indirectly by forecasting changes (in flows). For example, the stocks approach forecasts end-of-year receivables as a function of revenue, and the
flow approach forecasts the change in receivables as a function of the
growth in revenue. We favor the stocks approach. The relationship between
the balance sheet accounts and revenue (or other volume measures) is more
stable than that between balance sheet changes and changes in revenue.
Consider the example presented in Exhibit 8.8. The ratio of accounts receivable to revenue remains within a tight band between 9.5 percent and 10.4
percent, while the ratio of changes in accounts receivable to changes in revenues ranges from 5 percent to 18 percent.
To forecast the balance sheet, start with items related to invested capital
and nonoperating assets. Exhibit 8.9 on page 248 summarizes forecast drivers and forecast ratios for the most common line items.

Operating working capital To start the balance sheet, forecast items
within operating working capital, such as accounts receivable, inventories,
accounts payable, and accrued expenses. Remember, operating working
capital excludes any nonoperating items, such as excess cash (cash not
needed to operate the business), short-term debt, and dividends payable.
When forecasting operating working capital, estimate most line items as a
percentage of revenue. Possible exceptions are inventories and accounts
payable. Since these two accounts are tied to input prices, estimate them
instead as a percentage of cost of goods sold (which is also tied to input prices).
Exhibit 8.8 Stock versus Flow Example
Revenue ($)
Accounts receivable ($)
Stock method
Accounts receivable as a
percentage of revenue
Flow method
Change in accounts receivable
as a percentage of the change
in revenue

Year 1
1,000
100

Year 2
1,100
105

Year 3
1,200
117

Year 4
1,300
135

10.0

9.5

9.8

10.4

5.0

12.0

18.0

248

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 8.9 Typical Forecast Drivers and Ratios for the Balance Sheet

Operating
line items

Nonoperating
line items

Line item
Accounts receivable
Inventories
Accounts payable
Accrued expenses
Net PP&E
Goodwill

Typical
forecast driver
Revenue
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold
Revenue
Revenue
Acquired revenues

Typical
forecast ratio
Accounts receivable/revenue
Inventories/COGS
Accounts payable/COGS
Accrued expenses/revenue
Net PP&E/revenue
Goodwill/acquired revenue

Nonoperating assets
Pension assets or liabilities
Deferred taxes

None
None
Adjusted taxes

Growth in nonoperating assets
Trend towards zero
Change in deferred
taxes/adjusted taxes

However, as a practical matter, we usually simplify the forecast model by projecting each working capital item using revenues. The distinction is material
only when price is expected to deviate significantly away from cost per unit.
In Exhibit 8.10, we present a forecast of operating working capital, longterm operating assets, and nonoperating assets (investor funds will be detailed later). All working capital items are forecasted in days, computed

Exhibit 8.10 Partial Forecast of the Balance Sheet
Forecast worksheet
Forecast ratio
Cash (in days)
Inventory (in days)
Accounts payable (in days)
Net working capital (in days)

2004
7.6
68.4
(30.4)
45.6

2005E
7.6
68.4
(30.4)
45.6

$ million
Cash
Excess cash
Inventory
Current assets

2004
5.0
60.0
45.0
110.0

2005E
6.0

Fixed assets (percent)
Net PP&E/revenues

104.2

104.2

Net PP&E
Equity investments
Total assets

250.0
100.0
460.0

300.0
100.0
460.0

0.0

0.0

Liabilities and equity
Accounts payable
Short-term debt
Current liabilities

20.0
213.0
233.0

24.0

Long-term debt
Newly issued debt
Common stock
Retained earnings
Total liabilities and equity

80.0
0.0
65.0
82.0
460.0

Nonoperating assets (percent)
Growth in equity investments

Balance sheet

54.0

MECHANICS OF FORECASTING

249

using revenues. Working cash is estimated at 7.6 days of revenue, inventory
at 68.4 days of revenue, and accounts payable at 30.4 days of revenue. We
forecast in days for the added benefit of tying forecasts more closely to operations. For instance, if management announces its intention to reduce its
inventory holding period from 45 days to 30 days, we can compute changes
in value by adjusting the forecast directly.

Property, plant, and equipment Consistent with our earlier argument
concerning stocks and flows, net PP&E should be forecast as a percentage of
revenues. A common alternative is to forecast capital expenditures as a percentage of revenues. However, this method too easily leads to unintended
increases or decreases in capital turnover (the ratio of PP&E to revenues).
Over long periods, companies’ ratios of net PP&E to revenues tend to be
quite stable, so we favor the following approach for PP&E:
• Forecast net PP&E as a percentage of revenues.
• Forecast depreciation, typically as a percentage of gross or net PP&E.
• Calculate capital expenditures by computing the increase in net
PP&E plus depreciation.
To continue our example, we use the forecasts presented in Exhibit 8.10
to estimate expected capital expenditures. In 2004, net PP&E equaled 104.2
percent of revenues. If this ratio is held constant for 2005, the forecast of net
PP&E equals $300 million. To estimate capital expenditures, compute the
increase in net PP&E ($50 million), and add depreciation ($22.8 million).
Capital expenditures, therefore, are projected to equal $72.8 million.
If you forecast PP&E as a percentage of sales, always calculate and analyze implied capital expenditures. For companies with low growth rates
and projected improvements in capital efficiency, the resulting capital expenditure projections may be negative (implying asset sales), which in
turn, leads to positive cash flow. Although asset sales at book value are possible, they are unlikely.

Goodwill A company records goodwill when the price it paid for an acquisition exceeds the target’s book value. For most companies, we choose not to
explicitly model potential acquisitions, so we set revenue growth from acquisitions equal to zero and hold goodwill constant at its current level. We
prefer this approach because of the empirical literature documenting how
the typical acquisition fails to create value (any synergies are transferred to
the target through high premiums). Since adding a zero-NPV investment
will not increase the company’s value, forecasting acquisitions is unnecessary. In fact, by forecasting acquired growth in combination with the company’s current financial results, you make implicit (and often hidden)

250

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

assumptions about the present value of acquisitions. For instance, if the forecast ratio of goodwill to acquired revenue implies positive NPV for acquired
growth, increasing the growth rate from acquired revenue can dramatically
increase the resulting valuation, even when good deals are hard to find.
If you decide to forecast acquisitions, first assess what proportion of future revenue growth they are likely to provide. For example, consider a
company with $100 million in revenue that has announced an intention to
grow by 10 percent annually—5 percent organically and 5 percent through
acquisitions. In this case, measure historical ratios of goodwill to acquired
revenue and apply those ratios to acquired revenue. For instance, assume
the company historically adds $3 in goodwill for every $1 of acquired revenue. Multiplying the expected $5 million of acquired growth by 3, we obtain an expected increase of $15 million in goodwill. Make sure, however, to
perform a reality check on your results by varying acquired growth and observing the resulting changes in company value. Confirm that your results
are consistent with the company’s historical performance concerning recent acquisitions and marketwide empirical evidence.

Nonoperating assets, debt, and equity equivalents Next, forecast nonoperating assets (such as nonconsolidated subsidiaries and equity investments),
existing debt, and equity equivalents (such as pension liabilities and deferred
taxes). Because many nonoperating items are valued using methods other
than discounted cash flow (see Chapter 11), we usually create forecasts solely
for the purpose of financial planning. For instance, consider unfunded pension liabilities. Assume management announces its intention to reduce unfunded pensions by 50 percent over the next five years. To value unfunded
pensions, do not discount the projected outflows over the next five years. Instead, use the current actuarial assessments of the shortfall, which appears in
the footnote on pensions. The rate of reduction will have no valuation implications but will affect the ability to pay dividends or require additional debt
at particular times. To this end, model a reasonable time frame for eliminating pension shortfalls.
We are extremely cautious about forecasting (and valuing) nonconsolidated subsidiaries and other equity investments. Valuations should be
based on assessing the investments currently owned, not on discounting
the forecasted changes in their book values and resulting income. If a forecast is necessary for planning, consider that nonoperating assets often
grow in a lumpy fashion, unrelated to a company’s revenues. To forecast
equity investments, rely on historical precedent to determine the appropriate level of growth.
Regarding deferred taxes, those used to occur primarily through differences in depreciation schedules (investor and tax authorities use different depreciation schedules to determine taxable income). Today, deferred taxes arise
for many reasons, including tax adjustments for pensions, stock-based com-

MECHANICS OF FORECASTING

251

pensation, goodwill amortization, and deferred revenues. For sophisticated
valuations that require extremely detailed forecasts, forecast deferred taxes
line by line, tying each tax to its appropriate driver. In most situations, forecasting deferred taxes by computing the proportion of taxes likely to be deferred will lead to reasonable results. For instance, if operating taxes are
estimated at 34.4 percent of EBITA and the company historically has been able
to incrementally defer one-fifth of taxes paid, we assume it can defer 1⁄ 5 × 34.4
percent going forward. Liabilities will then increase by the amount deferred.

Step 5: Forecast the Balance Sheet: Investor Funds
To complete the balance sheet, forecast the company’s sources of financing.
To do this, rely on the rules of accounting. First, use the principle of clean
surplus accounting:
Retained Earnings(t+1) = Retained Earningst + Net Income − Dividends

Returning to our earlier example, Exhibit 8.11 presents the statement of
retained earnings. To estimate retained earnings in 2005, start with 2004 retained earnings of $82.0 million. To this value, add the 2005 forecast of net
income (from the income statement) of $59.4 million. Next, estimate the
dividend payout. In 2004, the company paid out 45.8 percent of net income
in the form of dividends. Applying a 45.8 percent payout ratio to estimated
net income leads to $27.2 million in expected dividends. Using the clean
surplus relation, we estimate 2005 retained earnings at $114.2 million.
At this point, five line items remain: excess cash, short-term debt, longterm debt, a new account titled newly issued debt, and common stock. Some
combination of these line items must make the balance sheet balance. For
this reason, these items are often referred to as “the plug.” In simple models, assume common stock remains constant and existing debt either remains constant or is retired on schedule. To complete the balance sheet, set
one of the remaining two items (excess cash or newly issued debt) equal to

Exhibit 8.11 Statement of Retained Earnings
$ million
Starting retained earnings
Net income
Dividends declared
Ending retained earnings

2003
36.0
36.0
(16.0)
56.0

2004
56.0
48.0
(22.0)
82.0

2005E
82.0
59.4
(27.2)
114.2

Dividends/net income (percent)

44.4

45.8

45.8

252

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 8.12: Forecast Balance Sheet: Sources of Financing
$ million
Cash
Excess cash
Inventory
Current assets

2003
5.0
100.0
35.0
140.0

2004
5.0
60.0
45.0
110.0

2005E
6.0

Net PP&E
Equity investments
Total assets

200.0
100.0
440.0

250.0
100.0
460.0

300.0
100.0

Liabilities and equity
Accounts payable
Short-term debt
Current liabilities

15.0
224.0
239.0

20.0
213.0
233.0

24.0
213.0
237.0

Long-term debt
Newly issued debt
Common stock
Retained earnings
Total liabilities and equity

80.0
0.0
65.0
56.0
440.0

80.0
0.0
65.0
82.0
460.0

80.0

54.0

65.0
114.2

Completed
2005E
6.0 Step 1: Determine retained
36.2
earnings using the clean
54.0
surplus relation, forecast
96.2
existing debt using
contractual terms, and keep
300.0
equity constant.
100.0
496.2 Step 2: Test which is higher, assets
excluding excess cash or
liabilities and equity,
24.0
excluding newly issued
213.0
debt.
237.0
Step 3: If assets excluding excess
80.0
cash are higher, set excess
0.0
cash equal to zero and plug
65.0
the difference with newly
114.2
issued debt. Otherwise, plug
496.2
with excess cash.

zero. Then use the primary accounting identity—assets equal liabilities
plus shareholder’s equity—to value the remaining item.
Exhibit 8.12 presents the elements of this process for our example. First,
hold short-term debt, long-term debt, and common stock constant. Next, sum
total assets, excluding excess cash: cash ($6 million), inventory ($54 million),
net PP&E ($300 million), and equity investments ($100 million) total $460
million. Then sum total liabilities and equity, excluding newly issued debt:
accounts payable ($24 million), short-term debt ($213 million), long-term
debt ($80 million), common stock ($65 million), and retained earnings
($114.2 million) total $496.2 million. Because residual liabilities and equity
(excluding newly issued debt) are greater than residual assets (excluding excess marketable securities), newly issued debt is set to zero. Now total liabilities and equity equal $496.2 million. To assure the balance sheet balances,
we set the only remaining item, excess cash, equal to $36.2 million. This increases total assets to $496.2 million, and the balance sheet is complete.
To implement this procedure in a spreadsheet, use Microsoft Excel’s
prebuilt “IF” function. Use the function to set excess cash to zero when assets (excluding excess cash) exceed liabilities and equity (excluding newly
issued debt). Conversely, if assets are less than liabilities and equity, use the
function to set short-term debt equal to zero and excess cash equal to the
difference.

MECHANICS OF FORECASTING

253

How capital structure affects valuation When using excess cash and newly
issued debt to complete the balance sheet, you will likely encounter one common side effect: as growth drops, newly issued debt will drop to zero, and excess cash will become very large. But what if a drop in leverage is inconsistent
with your long-term assessments concerning capital structure? From a valuation perspective, this side effect does not matter. Excess cash and debt are
not included as part of free cash flow, so they do not affect the enterprise valuation. Capital structure only affects enterprise DCF through the weighted
average cost of capital. Thus, only an adjustment to WACC will lead to a
change in valuation.
To bring capital structure in the balance sheet in line with capital structure implied by WACC, adjust the dividend payout ratio or amount of net
share repurchases. For instance, as the dividend payout is increased, retained earnings will drop, and this should cause excess cash to drop as well.
By varying the payout ratio, you can also test the robustness of your FCF
model. Specifically, ROIC and FCF, and hence value, should not change
when the dividend rate is adjusted.
How you choose to model the payout ratio depends on the requirements
of the model. In most situations, you can adjust the dividend payout ratio by
hand when needed (remember, the ratio does not affect value but rather
brings excess cash and newly issued debt closer to reality). For more complex models, determine net debt (total debt less excess cash) by applying the
target net-debt-to-value ratio modeled in the WACC at each point in time.
Next, using the target debt-to-value ratio, solve for the required dividend
payout. To do this, however, a valuation must be performed in each forecast
year and iterated backwards—a time-consuming process for a feature that
will not affect the final valuation.

Step 6: Calculate ROIC and FCF
Once you have completed your income statement and balance sheet
forecasts, calculate ROIC and FCF for each forecast year. This process
should be straightforward if you have already computed ROIC and FCF
historically. Since a full set of forecasted financials are available, merely
copy the two calculations across from historical financials to projected
financials.
The resulting ROIC projections should be consistent with the empirical
evidence provided in Chapter 6. For companies that are creating value, future ROICs should fit one of three general patterns. ROIC should either remain near current levels (when the company has a distinguishable
sustainable advantage), trend toward an industry or economic median, or
trend to the cost of capital. Think through the economics of the business to
decide what is appropriate.

254

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

ADDITIONAL ISSUES
The preceding sections detailed the process for creating a comprehensive set
of financial forecasts. When forecasting, you are likely to come across three
additional issues: forecasting using nonfinancial operating drivers, forecasting using fixed and variable costs, and handling the impact of inflation.

Nonfinancial Operating Drivers
Until now, we have created forecasts that rely solely on financial drivers. In
industries where prices are changing or technology is advancing, forecasts
should incorporate nonfinancial ratios, such as volume and productivity.
Consider the recent turmoil in the airline industry. Fares requiring
Saturday-night stays and advance purchases disappeared as competition intensified. Network carriers could no longer distinguish business travelers,
their primary source of profit, from leisure travelers. As the average price
dropped, costs rose as a percentage of sales. But were airlines truly becoming higher-cost? And how would this trend continue? To forecast changes
more accurately, we need to separate price from volume (as measured by
seat miles). Then, instead of forecasting costs as a percentage of revenues,
forecast costs as a function of expected quantity, in this case seat miles. For
instance, rather than forecast fuel cost as a percentage of revenues, project it
using gallons of fuel per seat mile, combined with a market forecast for the
price of oil.
The same concept applies to advances in technology. For instance,
rather than estimate labor as a percentage of revenues, one could forecast
units per employee and average salary per employee. By separating these
two drivers of labor costs, you can model a direct relation between productivity improvements from new technology and estimated changes in units
per employee.

Fixed versus Variable Costs
When you are valuing a small project, it is important to distinguish fixed
costs (incurred once to create a basic infrastructure) from variable costs
(correlated with volume). When you are valuing an individual project, only
variable costs should be increased as revenues grow.
At the scale of most publicly traded companies, however, the distinction
between fixed and variable costs is often immaterial, because nearly every
cost is variable. For instance, consider a mobile-phone company that transmits calls using radio-frequency towers. In spite of the common perception
that the tower is a fixed cost, this is only true for a given number of subscribers. As subscribers increase beyond a certain limit, new towers must be
added, even in an area with preexisting coverage. The same holds true for

ADDITIONAL ISSUES

255

technology purchases (such as servers) and support functions (such as
human resources). What is a fixed cost in the short run for small increases
in activity becomes variable over the long run even at reasonable growth
rates (remember, 10 percent annual growth doubles the size of a company
in about seven years). Since corporate valuation is about long-run profitability and growth, nearly every cost should be treated as variable.
When an asset, such as computer software, is truly scalable, it should be
treated as a fixed cost. Be careful, however. Many technologies, such as computer software, quickly become obsolete, requiring new incremental expenditures for the company to remain competitive. In this case, a cost deemed
fixed actually requires repeated cash outflows.

Inflation
In Chapter 5, we recommended that forecasts and the cost of capital be estimated in nominal (with price inflation) rather than real (without price inflation) currency units. To remain consistent, the nominally based financial
forecast and the nominally based cost of capital must reflect the same expected general inflation rate. This means that the inflation rate built into the
forecast must be derived from an inflation rate implicit in the cost of capital.5
When possible, derive the expected inflation rate from the term structure of government bond rates. The nominal interest rate on government
bonds reflects investor demands for a real return plus a premium for expected inflation. Estimate expected inflation as the nominal rate of interest
less an estimate of the real rate of interest, using the following formula:
Expected Inflation =

(1 + Nominal Rate )
−1
(1 + Real Rate )

To estimate expected inflation, start by calculating the nominal yield to
maturity on a 10-year government bond. But how do you find the real rate?
Starting in 1981, the British government began issuing “linkers.” A linker is
a bond that protects against inflation by growing the bond’s coupons and
principal at the consumer price index. Consequently, the yield to maturity
5
Individual line items may have specific inf lation rates that are higher or lower than the general rate, but they should still derive from the general rate. For example, the revenue forecast
should ref lect the growth in units sold and the expected increase in unit prices. The increase in
unit prices, in turn, should ref lect the generally expected level of inf lation in the economy plus
or minus an inf lation rate differential for that specific product. Suppose general inf lation is expected to be 4.0 percent and unit prices for the company’s products are expected to increase at
1 percent lower than general inf lation. Overall, the company’s prices would be expected to increase at 3.0 percent per year. If we assume a 3.0 percent annual increase in units sold, we
would forecast 6.1 percent annual revenue growth (1.03 × 1.03 − 1).

256

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 8.13 Expected Inflation versus Growth in the Consumer Price Index
Implict expected inflation as
derived using 10-year US TIPS bonds

3.0%
2.5%
2.0%

Annualized growth in the
consumer price index

1.5%
1.0%
0.5%
0.0%
January
2000

January
2001

January
2002

January
2003

January
2004

on a linker is the market’s expectation of the real interest rate for the life of
the bond. Since the British first introduced inflation-indexed bonds, more
than 20 countries have followed suit, including Brazil, the European Central
Bank, Israel, South Africa, and the United States. In December 2004, the
yield on a 10-year U.S. treasury bond equaled 4.2 percent, and the yield on a
U.S. TIPS (inflation-indexed) bond equaled 1.7 percent. To determine expected inflation, apply the previous formula:
Expected Inflation =

1.042
− 1 = 0.025
1.017

Expected inflation, as measured by the difference in nominal and real
bonds, thus equals 2.5 percent annually over the next 10 years.
Data from the past few years in the United States supports this approach. Exhibit 8.13 presents annualized growth in the U.S. consumer price
index versus expected inflation implied by traditional U.S. Treasury bonds
and U.S. TIPS.6 In the exhibit, expected inflation (as measured by the formula) precedes changes in the actual consumer price index, which is a measure of historical inflation. The two sets of numbers track quite closely, and
near the end of 2004, both rates were roughly 2 percent annually.
6

Although the U.S. TIPS bond began trading in 1997, the U.S. government only began disseminating comparable 10-year yields in 2003.

CREATING SCENARIOS

257

Inflation will also distort historical analysis, especially when it exceeds
5 percent annually. In these situations, historical financials should be adjusted to better reflect operating performance, independent of inflation. We
discuss the impact of high inflation rates in Chapter 22, in the context of
emerging markets.

HEINEKEN CASE
In this section of the Heineken case, we develop a forecast for Heineken’s financial
performance, following the approach laid out in the chapter. First, we offer a strategic
perspective on Heineken and describe several scenarios. We then translate the base
case scenario into a financial forecast.
For this case, we use a five-year detailed forecast, followed by a summary forecast
for 10 years. The continuing value follows after the 15-year forecast (discussed in the
next chapter).

CREATING SCENARIOS
The beer industry grows slowly and is fragmented on a global basis but concentrated
on a regional (or country) basis. Growth opportunities in the emerging markets are expected to outpace those of Europe and North America. Most markets have consolidated; as a result, apart from a mega merger, the integrators can anticipate only the
relatively slow growth they can squeeze out organically or through acquisitions in
emerging markets.
Heineken’s strategy is to leverage its brand and its manufacturing and marketing
skills worldwide. That strategy has several key features:
• Product development: Heineken has a global standard for the recipe of its main
brands. This standard minimizes product development costs and ensures
consistent quality worldwide.
• Brewing: Heineken controls quality by using a roving staff of brewmasters, who
employ best practices in production sites worldwide. This helps the company
lower brewing costs in developed markets and add value to sites it purchases or
develops in new markets. To maximize penetration into new markets, Heineken
combines exports, licensed brewing, and acquisition of production capacity
and local brands.
• Packaging: Although Heineken standardizes images on beer labels to support
brand awareness, it also tailors packaging to satisfy local customers’ tastes. This
may add variable costs, but the impact is more than offset by the company’s
success in penetrating markets.

258

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

• Marketing: Leveraging its brand is an important part of Heineken’s success.
Heineken is the most global player in the market; its beer can be found in more
than 170 countries. Heineken bills its major brands (Heineken and Amstel) as
premium products in non-European markets and as mainstream products in European markets. It segments marketing and advertising campaigns to capture
the highest possible premium.
Heineken supports this business strategy with acquisitions. The company has purchased a large number of producers and distributors since its major expansion in Europe during the 1980s. In 2003 alone, Heineken consolidated Karlsberg International
Brand (Germany), Dinal LLP (Kazakhstan), CCU (Chile), Karlovacka Pivovara (Croatia),
and BBAG (Austria with operations in Romania, Hungary, and the Czech Republic).
The company has grown faster through acquisitions than any other major brewer except Interbrew and SABMiller.
For valuing Heineken, we developed three scenarios that could describe the company’s potential strategy and business climate:
1. Business as usual: Under the business-as-usual scenario, the industry experiences no major shocks, Heineken continues to grow organically at a modest
rate, and its margins and capital efficiency remain constant at 2004 levels
(after a projected decline from 2003). Heineken also makes a series of small
acquisitions.
2. Aggressive acquisition: Heineken and its competitors accelerate their growth
through acquisitions. This strategy drives up acquisition prices, reducing returns on capital.
3. Operating improvement: In this scenario, Heineken focuses on improving its
operations, ultimately increasing its margins and return on capital to the levels
it achieved in 2001.
For the remainder of this chapter and in Chapter 9, we will analyze only the
business-as-usual scenario in detail. The resulting valuations of the other two scenarios
will be summarized in Chapter 11.

THE FIVE-YEAR FORECAST
We typically create an explicit forecast of 10 to 15 years, so the company can
reach a steady-state financial performance before we apply a continuing value. We
divide the explicit forecast period into two subperiods. For the first subperiod (five
years in Heineken’s case), we forecast complete income statements and balance
sheets. For the remaining subperiod (10 years in Heineken’s case), we use a condensed forecast.
As with most forecasts, Heineken’s forecast is driven by revenues (or “turnover,”
as it is called in Heineken’s financial statements). In other words, we derive most income statement and balance sheet line items from the revenue forecast. The detailed
projections for the first five years are laid out in Exhibit 8.14 on page 259 and Exhibit
8.15 on page 260.

THE FIVE-YEAR FORECAST

259

Exibit 8.14 Heineken: Short-Term Financial Forecast
Historical
1999 2000

2001

2002

2003

Forecast
2004 2005

0.0
2.0
2.0
8.0
2.0
1.0
13.0

2.0
3.0
5.0
7.0
1.0
0.8
13.8

1.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
2.0
0.2
13.2

2.0
4.0
6.0
7.0
-1.0
1.5
13.5

1.5
3.5
5.0
8.0
-4.0
-6.3
2.7

1.5
1.5
3.0
8.0
-1.0
0.0
10.0

46.9

46.3

45.9

44.5

48.2

15.6

15.8

16.1

17.6

18.4
12.0

18.5
12.7

17.9
12.6

8.2

8.4

0.0
4.0

2006

2007

2008

1.5
1.5
3.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
8.0

1.5
1.5
3.0
4.0
0.0
0.0
7.0

1.5
1.5
3.0
3.0
0.0
0.0
6.0

1.5
1.5
3.0
2.0
0.0
0.0
5.0

48.9

48.9

48.9

48.9

48.9

12.2

12.8

12.8

12.8

12.8

12.8

18.2
11.8

19.8
11.3

19.8
11.3

19.8
11.3

19.8
11.3

19.8
11.3

19.8
11.3

8.6

6.5

4.7

4.5

4.5

4.5

4.5

4.5

0.0
4.0

0.0
4.0

0.0
4.0

0.0
4.0

4.5
4.0

4.5
4.0

4.5
4.0

4.5
4.0

4.5
4.0

4.7

4.0

6.9

3.6

6.7

1.9

1.9

1.9

1.9

1.9

34.9
33.2

35.0
31.8

35.0
31.2

34.5
30.4

34.5
28.5

34.5
28.5

34.5
28.5

34.5
28.5

34.5
28.5

34.5
28.5

3.7

1.9

5.4

5.3

6.3

6.3

6.3

6.3

6.3

6.3

Dividends (€ millions)
Dividends

125

125

157

157

157

157

157

157

157

157

Other
Amortization of goodwill

0

0

0

0

31

55

79

95

109

121

51

59

45

48

101

31

33

36

38

40

Turnover growth (percent)
Organic volume growth
Price increase/mix change
Underlying organic growth
Acquisitions
Currency changes
Accounting change/other
Turnover growth
Operating expense ratios (percent)
Raw materials, consumables
and services (of net turnover)
Marketing and selling expenses
(of net turnover)
Staff costs (of net turnover)
Depreciation (of fixed assets)
Interest rates (percent)
Interest rate on existing debt
(on beginning of year balance)
Interest rate on new debt
Interest rate on retirement
related liabilities
Interest rate on excess cash
(on beginning of year balance)
Taxes (percent)
Statutory tax rate in Netherlands
Operating tax rate
Minority interest (percent)
Minority interest
(of profit before tax and
goodwill amortization)

Results of nonconsolidated
participating interests (€ millions)

Turnover
Each year ’s turnover equals the prior year ’s turnover grown at a projected rate. The
projected growth rate is the sum of volume growth, price/mix changes, currency effects, and growth from acquisitions.
The 2004 forecast was based on analyst projections. The 2004 forecast includes
volume growth of 1.5 percent, a price/mix increase of 1.5 percent, 8 percent growth

260

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 8.15 Heineken: Balance Sheet Forecast Assumptions
Historical
1999 2000
Working capital
Operating cash
(percent of net turnover)
Accounts receivable (days)
Stocks (days)
Other current assets (days)
Accounts payable (days)
Tax payable (days)
Other current liabilities (days)

2001

2002

2003

Forecast
2004 2005

2006

2007

2008

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

2.0

44.1
29
9.3
27.1
17.1
31.8

44.6
28.6
8.6
27.5
15
29.6

45.3
31.8
9.5
28.5
15.4
27.7

43.2
31
8.3
25.5
13
22.4

47.5
32.9
6.9
29.4
15.5
25.4

47.5
32.9
6.9
29.4
15.5
25.4

47.5
32.9
6.9
29.4
15.5
25.4

47.5
32.9
6.9
29.4
15.5
25.4

47.5
32.9
6.9
29.4
15.5
25.4

47.5
32.9
6.9
29.4
15.5
25.4

48.1

46.3

45.4

45.9

54.6

54.6

54.6

54.6

54.6

54.6

3.1

4.0

2.3

4.6

4.7

4.7

4.7

4.7

4.7

4.7

0

35

30

22

18

18

18

18

18

18

233

301

318

401

671

671

671

671

671

671

Other liabilities (€ million)
Retirement related liability
Short-tem debt
Long-term debt
Deferred tax liabilities
Other provisions

48
488
490
295
158

100
428
875
312
158

112
570
797
357
133

352
1,039
1,215
381
133

526
1,113
2,721
415
133

526
283
2,438
427
146

526
283
2,154
440
158

526
283
1,871
453
169

526
283
1,587
467
179

526
283
1,304
481
188

Minority interest

248

124

381

393

732

763

798

835

876

918

Capital expenditure
Tangible fixed assets
(percent of net turnover)
Other assets
Nonconsolidated participating
interests (shares and loans,
percent of net turnover)
Deferred tax assets
(percent of turnover)
Other financial fixed
assets (€ million)

from acquisitions, and a 1 percent decline due to currency effects. Normally, we would
not forecast currency changes, but Heineken had partially hedged its results against a
decline in the dollar in 2002 and 2003. Unless the dollar strengthened in 2004, the decline in the dollar in 2002 and 2003 would reduce 2004 turnover because the hedges
have expired.
For the next four years, we projected Heineken’s underlying volume growth to
average 1.5 percent per year, somewhat lower than the industry because of Heineken’s stronger presence in the slower-growing developed markets. The geographic
mix of sales affects average prices realized, since prices are lower in emerging markets. We forecast effective price increases to drop to 1.5 percent per year and continue at that level throughout the explicit forecast period, as more sales shift to
developing markets. This is somewhat lower than historical price increases. Finally,
we assumed that the pace of acquisitions growth will decline over the course of the
five-year forecast. We forecast turnover growth from acquisitions to be 8 percent in
2004, declining to zero in 2009.

THE FIVE-YEAR FORECAST

261

Operating Expenses
We forecast operating expenses as a percentage of turnover. The accounting change
for discounts makes historical comparisons difficult. Before 2003, turnover was reported before subtracting discounts, and discounts were treated as an expense. Beginning in 2003, discounts were netted against turnover, so operating expenses as a
percent of turnover appears to decline in 2003. From 1999 to 2002, the sum of operating expenses was roughly constant as a percent of sales. The changes in 2003 were
due to the accounting change for discounts and the acquisitions made during the year.
We projected 2004 operating expenses using analysts’ forecasts, which expect an
increase in costs relative to turnover versus 2003. A significant portion of the cost increase is due to the weakening of the dollar. (Heineken receives U.S. dollars from sales
in the United States but produces the beer in Holland at euro costs.) Given the historical consistency in operating-expense ratios, we projected operating costs at a constant percent to turnover from 2005 through 2008.

Depreciation
Most of the depreciable assets purchased by Heineken are related to the company’s
breweries; they include buildings and large machinery. In the years 1999 to 2003, depreciation was between 11 and 13 percent of net tangible fixed assets. We assumed
that depreciation remains constant as a percentage of net tangible fixed assets, given
the slow growth and industrial nature of the business.

Interest Expense and Income
We estimated each year ’s interest expense based on the level of debt at the beginning of
that year, rather than the average for the year, to avoid circular calculations. We forecast
the interest rate on Heineken’s debt to be 4.5 percent, its current borrowing rate and
close to its effective rate in 2003. To estimate the interest rate on excess marketable securities, we used the interest rate on one-year bonds in the Netherlands (1.9 percent).

Taxes
We estimated Heineken’s marginal tax rate as 34.5 percent, the statutory tax rate in
the Netherlands. Heineken’s effective tax rate on operating profits is expected to remain at its 2003 level of 28.5 percent, with cash taxes somewhat lower due to deferred taxes.

Minority Interest
We assumed that minority interest will remain at about 6.3 percent of profits before
taxes and goodwill amortization.

Dividends
Heineken maintains a conservative dividend policy, so we assumed that its dividend
will remain constant over the next five years.

262

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

Goodwill Amortization
We projected goodwill amortization using the prior year ’s amortization plus onetwentieth of the increase in goodwill.7

Results of Nonconsolidated Participating Interests
The results from nonconsolidated participating interests represent Heineken’s share
of the income of nonconsolidated affiliates. In 2003, Heineken reported nonconsolidated participating interests income of €101 million. Most of this, however, came
from the sale of investments, not ongoing income. The ongoing income represented
about 6.5 percent of the balance sheet account for nonconsolidated participating interests. We assumed that future income would remain at 6.5 percent of the balance
sheet amount.

Working Capital
Operating working capital comprises operating cash, accounts receivable, stocks (inventories), and other current assets (such as prepaid expenses) less accounts payable
and other current liabilities (such as taxes payable). Working capital does not include
financing items such as short-term debt or dividends payable. Between 1999 and
2003, net working capital increased from 2.3 percent to 6.7 percent, driven mainly by
an increase in accounts receivable. We forecast that net working capital will remain at
6.7 percent of net turnover. To simplify later analysis, we express working capital forecasts in day’s sales.

Tangible Fixed Assets
To forecast tangible fixed assets (called property, plant, and equipment in the United
States), we used a simple approach. We made an assumption about the amount of net
fixed assets it takes to generate each dollar of sales. Because of Heineken’s acquisitions of companies with higher fixed assets and the effect of the revenue accounting
change in 2003, the company’s net fixed assets to net turnover increased from 48.1
percent in 1999 to 54.6 percent in 2003. We forecast that net fixed assets will remain
the same as in 2003. Note that this simplified forecast approach might not hold for a
high-growth company or one operating in an inflationary environment.

Goodwill
Since our forecast of turnover growth includes acquisitions, we also had to forecast
goodwill associated with the acquisitions. We forecast that goodwill would equal 155

7

This forecast was developed using accounting rules for goodwill amortization that are no longer in
effect. As explained in Chapter 7, the change in accounting for goodwill has no impact on value or
performance.

THE FIVE-YEAR FORECAST

263

percent of the turnover from acquisitions in the year of the acquisition. This is consistent with historical relationships.

Nonconsolidated Participating Interests
Nonconsolidated participating interests were 4.7 percent of turnover in 2003. We kept
this amount constant going forward.

Deferred Tax Assets
Since the deferred tax assets are very small, we held them constant.

Other Financial Fixed Assets
Other financial fixed assets are primarily loans to customers. We assumed these remain constant.

Retirement-Related Liability
The retirement-related liability is the difference between the company’s retirement assets and the actuarial liability for current and former employees. We assumed this remains constant.

Short- and Long-Term Debt
We forecast long-term debt based on the retirement schedules in Heineken’s annual
report footnotes. Short-term debt includes both debt due within one year and the current portion of long-term debt. We assumed that true short-term debt is paid down and
only the current portion of long-term debt remains on the balance sheet. We used a
line called “New long-term debt ” to reflect future financing needs.

Deferred Tax Liabilities
Deferred tax liabilities were projected to grow at the same rate as EBITA.

Provisions
We projected that Heineken would pay off its restructuring provision in 2004. Its other
provisions would grow at the same rate as turnover.

Minority Interest
Minority interest on the balance sheet increases each year by the minority interest on
the income statement less an assumed 50 percent dividend. This forecast is based on
the assumption that the subsidiaries with minority interests are mature and therefore
can be expected to pay out a high percentage of profits as dividends.

264

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

Exhibit 8.16 Heineken: Forecast Income Statement
€ million

Net turnover
Raw materials and consumables
Marketing and selling expenses
Staff costs
EBITDA
Depreciation
EBITA
Amortization of goodwill
Operating profit
Interest paid
Interest received
Profit before tax
Taxation
Results of nonconsolidated
participating interests (after tax)
Minority interest
Income before extraordinary items
Extraordinary items (after tax)
Net profit
Shareholders’ equity
Position as of 1 January
Exchange differences
Reclassification of dividend payable
Revaluations
Goodwill written off
Net profit for the year
Dividends
Position as of 31 December

Historical Forecast
2003
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
9,255
10,181 10,995 11,765 12,470 13,094
(4,461)
(4,978) (5,377) (5,753) (6,098) (6,403)
(1,131)
(1,303) (1,407) (1,506) (1,596) (1,676)
(1,832)
(2,015) (2,176) (2,329) (2,468) (2,592)
1,831
1,884 2,035 2,177 2,308 2,423
(578)
(628) (678) (726) (769) (808)
1,253
1,256 1,356 1,451 1,538 1,615
(31)
(55)
(79)
(95) (109) (121)
1,222
1,201 1,278 1,356 1,429 1,495
(180)
(173)
(96)
(66)
(44)
(29)
40
24
0
0
0
0
1,082
1,052 1,182 1,290 1,385 1,465
(319)
(307) (354) (391) (424) (451)
101
31
33
36
38
40
(66)
798
0
798

2,543
(152)
94
41
0
798
(157)
3,167

(63)
714
0
714

(69)
792
0
792

(75)
860
0
860

(80)
919
0
919

(84)
970
0
970

3,167 3,724 4,359 5,061 5,824
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
714
792
860
919
970
(157) (157) (157) (157) (157)
3,724 4,359 5,061 5,824 6,637

Exhibits 8.16 to 8.22 show the resulting projected income statements, balance
sheets, and calculations of NOPLAT, invested capital, free cash flow, and economic
profit for the years 2003 to 2008. (The weighted average cost of capital is calculated
in Chapter 10.)

MEDIUM-TERM FORECAST
For the years 2009 to 2018, we used a streamlined model, projecting only core value
drivers such as net turnover growth, EBITA margin, the ratio of working capital to revenues, and the ratio of fixed assets to revenues. Our forecast assumes that Heineken
reaches a steady state, with constant growth, margins, and ROIC beginning in 2009.
We could have applied the terminal value at this point but have instead presented the
10-year forecast to illustrate what the streamlined forecast looks like. The assumptions

CHECK FOR REASONABLENESS

265

Exhibit 8.17 Heineken: Forecast Balance Sheets
€ million

Operating cash
Excess cash and marketable securities
Accounts receivable
Stocks (inventory)
Other current assets
Total current assets
Tangible fixed assets
Goodwill
Nonconsolidated participating interests
Deferred tax assets
Other financial fixed assets
Total assets

Historical Forecast
2003
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
185
204
220
235
249
262
1,231
0
0
0
0
0
1,205
1,326 1,432 1,532 1,624 1,705
834
917
991 1,060 1,124 1,180
174
191
207
221
234
246
3,629
2,638 2,849 3,048 3,231 3,393
5,053
5,558 6,003 6,423 6,809 7,149
1,093
1,516 1,766 1,954 2,073 2,113
433
476
514
550
583
613
18
18
18
18
18
18
671
671
671
671
671
671
10,897
10,877 11,821 12,665 13,385 13,957

Short-term debt
Accounts payable
Tax payable
Dividend payable
Other current liabilities
Total current debt

1,113
745
392
16
644
2,910

283
820
431
18
708
2,260

283
885
466
19
765
2,418

283
947
498
20
819
2,568

283
1,004
528
22
868
2,705

283
1,054
555
23
911
2,826

Long-term debt
New debt
Deferred tax liabilities
Retirement liabilities
Other provisions
Restructuring provision
Total long-term liabilities

2,721
0
415
526
133
293
4,088

2,438
593
427
526
146
0
4,130

2,154
967
440
526
158
0
4,246

1,871
1,181
453
526
169
0
4,201

1,587
1,221
467
526
179
0
3,981

1,304
1,077
481
526
188
0
3,576

Shareholders’ equity
Minority interest
Total equity

3,167
732
3,899

3,724
763
4,487

4,359
798
5,157

5,061
835
5,897

5,824
876
6,699

6,637
918
7,555

Total liabilities and
shareholders’ equity

10,897

10,877 11,821 12,665 13,385 13,957

are laid out in Exhibit 8.23, and the resulting summary financial statements appear in
Exhibit 8.24.

CHECK FOR REASONABLENESS
Exhibit 8.25 summarizes Heineken’s performance in the business-as-usual scenario.
Heineken’s growth falls significantly from its historically high level, as Heineken slows
down its acquisitions strategy. ROIC declines somewhat, primarily reflecting the weak
performance expected in 2004. Future acquisitions also reduce Heineken’s ROIC (including goodwill). Overall, the results are consistent with the scenario and current
strategy we have described.

Exhibit 8.18 Heineken: Forecast NOPLAT
€ million

EBITA
Adjustment for retirement liability
Increase (decrease) in other provisions
Adjusted EBITA
Taxes on EBITA
Increase (decrease) in deferred tax liability
NOPLAT

Historical Forecast
2003
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
1,253
1,256 1,356 1,451 1,538 1,615
21
21
21
21
21
21
0
13
12
11
10
9
1,274
1,290 1,389 1,483 1,569 1,645
(375)
(365) (394) (421) (446) (468)
38
12
13
13
14
14
937
937 1,008 1,075 1,137 1,191

Taxes on EBITA
Reported taxes
Tax shield on interest paid
Taxes on interest received
Tax shield on retirement liabilities
Taxes on EBITA

(319)
(62)
14
(7)
(375)

(307)
(60)
8
(7)
(365)

(354)
(33)
0
(7)
(394)

(391)
(23)
0
(7)
(421)

(424)
(15)
0
(7)
(446)

(451)
(10)
0
(7)
(468)

798
0
38
0
66
(101)

714
13
12
0
63
(31)

792
12
13
0
69
(33)

860
11
13
0
75
(36)

919
10
14
0
80
(38)

970
9
14
0
84
(40)

31
832
118
14

55
826
113
14

79
931
63
14

95
1,018
43
14

109
1,095
29
14

121
1,158
19
14

964
(26)
937

953 1,008
(15)
0
937 1,008

1,075
0
1,075

1,137
0
1,137

1,191
0
1,191

Reconciliation to net profit
Net profit
Increase (decrease) in other provisions
Increase (decrease) in deferred tax liability
Extraordinary items
Minority interest
Results of nonconsolidated
participating interests
Amortization of goodwill
Adjusted net profit
Interest paid after tax
Interest expense on retirement
liabilities
Total income available to investors
Interest received after tax
NOPLAT

266

Exhibit 8.19 Heineken: Forecast Invested Capital
€ million

Operating current assets
Operating current liabilities
Operating working capital
Tangible fixed assets
Operating invested capital
(before goodwill)
Goodwill
Cumulative goodwill written
off and amortized
Operating invested capital
(after goodwill)
Excess cash and marketable securities
Nonconsolidated participating interests
Other financial fixed assets
Total investor funds
Shareholders’ equity
Cumulative goodwill written
off and amortized
Minority interests
Other provisions
Net deferred taxes
Dividend payable
Adjusted equity
Debt
Retirement liabilities
Restructuring provision
Total investor funds

Historical Forecast
2003
2004 2005
2,398
2,638 2,849
(1,781)
(1,959) (2,116)
617
679
733
5,053
5,558 6,003
5,670
6,237 6,736

2006
3,048
(2,264)
784
6,423
7,208

2007 2008
3,231 3,393
(2,400) (2,520)
831
873
6,809 7,149
7,640 8,022

1,093
3,059

1,516
3,114

1,954
3,287

2,073
3,396

9,822

10,867 11,694 12,449 13,109 13,652

1,231
433
671
12,157

0
0
0
0
0
476
514
550
583
613
671
671
671
671
671
12,014 12,879 13,670 14,364 14,936

3,167
3,059

3,724
3,114

732
133
397
16
7,504
3,834
526
293
12,157

763
798
835
876
918
146
158
169
179
188
409
422
435
449
463
18
19
20
22
23
8,174 8,948 9,809 10,746 11,745
3,314 3,405 3,336 3,092 2,664
526
526
526
526
526
0
0
0
0
0
12,014 12,879 13,670 14,364 14,936

1,766
3,192

4,359
3,192

5,061
3,287

5,824
3,396

2,113
3,517

6,637
3,517

267

Exhibit 8.20 Heineken: Forecast Cash Flow
€ million
Historical
2003

Forecast
2004 2005

2006

2007

2008

Operating cash flows
NOPLAT
Depreciation
Gross cash flow

937
578
1,515

937
628
1,565

1,075
726
1,801

1,137
769
1,907

1,191
808
1,999

(Increase) decrease in working capital
Capital expenditures
Gross investment

93
(1,609)
(1,516)

(62)
(54)
(51)
(47)
(42)
(1,133) (1,123) (1,146) (1,155) (1,148)
(1,195) (1,177) (1,197) (1,202) (1,190)

Free cash flow before goodwill
Investment in goodwill
Free cash flow after goodwill

0
(1,124)
(1,124)

370
(478)
(107)

509
(328)
181

604
(284)
320

705
(228)
477

809
(161)
648

26
(633)

15
1,231

0
0

0
0

0
0

0
0

101

31

33

36

38

40

(21)

(43)

(38)

(36)

(33)

(29)

(1,921)

1,126

176

320

482

659

118
14
66
(339)
(1,580)
(174)

113
14
63
(31)
520
0

63
14
69
(35)
(91)
0

43
14
75
(38)
70
0

29
14
80
(40)
243
0

19
14
84
(42)
428
0

(178)

293

0

0

0

0

157
(1,921)

157
1,126

157
176

157
320

157
482

157
659

After-tax interest received
(Increase) decrease in excess marketable
securities
Results of nonconsolidated participating
interests
(Increase) decrease in nonconsolidated
participating interests
Cash flow to investors
Financing flows
After tax interest paid
Interest on retirement related liabilities
Minority interest (income statement)
(Increase) decrease in minority interest
(Increase) decrease in debt
(Increase) decrease in
retirement related liabilities
(Increase) decrease in
restructuring provisions
Dividends
Total financing flows

268

1,008
678
1,686

Exhibit 8.21 Heineken: Forecast Economic Profit
€ million, percent
Before goodwill
After-tax ROIC (on beginning of year invested capital)
WACC
Spread

Historical
2003
16.5%
7.7%
8.8%

Forecast
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
16.5% 16.2% 16.0% 15.8% 15.6%
7.5%
7.5% 7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
9.0%
8.7%
8.5% 8.3% 8.1%

Invested capital (beginning of year)
Economic profit

5,670
501

5,670
512

NOPLAT
Capital charge
Economic profit

937
(437)
501

937 1,008 1,075 1,137 1,191
(425) (468) (505) (541) (573)
512
540
570
597
618

After goodwill
After-tax ROIC (on beginning of year invested capital)
WACC
Spread

11.9%
7.7%
4.2%

9.5%
7.5%
2.0%

Invested capital (beginning of year)
Economic profit

9,822
181

9,822 10,867 11,694 12,449 13,109
201
193
198
203
208

NOPLAT
Capital charge
Economic profit

937
(756)
181

937 1,008 1,075 1,137 1,191
(737) (815) (877) (934) (1,024)
201
193
198
203
208

6,237
540

9.3%
7.5%
1.8%

6,736
570

9.2%
7.5%
1.7%

7,208
597

9.1%
7.5%
1.6%

7,640
618

9.1%
7.5%
1.6%

269

Exhibit 8.22 Heineken: Supporting Calculations
€ million

Change in working capital
Increase (decrease) in operating cash
Increase (decrease) in accounts receivable
Increase (decrease) in stocks
Increase (decrease) in other current assets
(Increase) in accounts payable
(Increase) decrease in tax payable
(Increase) decrease in other
current liabilities
Net change in working capital
Capital expenditures
Increase (decrease) in tangible
fixed assets
Depreciation
Exchange differences
Revaluation
Capital expenditures (net of disposals)
Investment in goodwill
Increase (decrease) in software and other
Increase (decrease) in cumulative
goodwill written off and amortized
Investment in goodwill
Other nonoperating cash flows
(Increase) decrease in other
financial fixed assets
Nonoperating cash flows

270

Historical
2003

Forecast
2004 2005

2006

2007

2008

5
139
69
(30)
(116)
(70)
(90)

19
121
83
17
(75)
(39)
(64)

16
106
73
15
(66)
(34)
(57)

15
100
69
14
(62)
(33)
(54)

14
92
64
13
(57)
(30)
(49)

12
81
56
12
(50)
(26)
(43)

(93)

62

54

51

47

42

920

505

445

420

385

340

578
152
(41)
1,609

628
0
0
1,133

678
0
0
1,123

726
0
0
1,146

769
0
0
1,155

808
0
0
1,148

1,093
31

423
55

250
79

189
95

119
109

40
121

1,124

478

328

284

228

161

(270)

0

0

0

0

0

(270)

0

0

0

0

0

271

13.8
26.4
6.7
54.6
1.6
22.5
16.5
9.5
17.1
(1.7)
1.7

Adjusted EBITA margin
Cash tax rate

Operating working capital/net turnover
Tangible fixed assets/net turnover

Net turnover/invested capital (times)

Pre-tax ROIC
ROIC
ROIC including goodwill

Invested capital growth
Adjusted EBITA growth
NOPLAT growth

Continuing value
ROIC
NOPLAT growth

1.5
3.5
5.0
8.0
(4.0)
(6.3)
2.7

Historical
2003

Turnover growth
Organic volume growth
Price increase/mix change
Underlying organic growth
Acquisitions
Currency changes
Accounting change/other
Turnover growth

percent

10.0
1.3
0.0

21.7
15.7
9.1

1.7

6.7
54.6

12.7
27.4

1.5
1.5
3.0
8.0
(1.0)
0.0
10.0

15.0
3.0

8.0
7.7
7.5

21.4
15.5
8.9

1.7

6.7
54.6

12.6
27.4

1.5
1.5
3.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
8.0

Forecast
2004 2005

7.0
6.8
6.7

21.3
15.4
8.9

1.7

6.7
54.6

12.6
27.5

1.5
1.5
3.0
4.0
0.0
0.0
7.0

2006

6.0
5.8
5.7

21.1
15.3
8.9

1.7

6.7
54.6

12.6
27.5

1.5
1.5
3.0
3.0
0.0
0.0
6.0

2007

5.0
4.8
4.8

21.0
15.2
8.9

1.7

6.7
54.6

12.6
27.6

1.5
1.5
3.0
2.0
0.0
0.0
5.0

2008

Exhibit 8.23 Heineken: Forecast Medium-Term Operating Ratios

3.1
2.5
2.5

20.7
15.0
8.9

1.7

6.7
54.6

12.5
27.6

1.5
1.5
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.0

2009

3.0
3.0
3.0

20.7
15.0
9.0

1.7

6.7
54.6

12.5
27.6

1.5
1.5
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.0

2010

3.0
3.0
3.0

20.7
15.0
9.1

1.7

6.7
54.6

12.5
27.6

1.5
1.5
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.0

2011

3.0
3.0
3.0

20.7
15.0
9.2

1.7

6.7
54.6

12.5
27.6

1.5
1.5
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.0

2012

3.0
3.0
3.0

20.7
15.0
9.3

1.7

6.7
54.6

12.5
27.6

1.5
1.5
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.0

2013

3.0
3.0
3.0

20.7
15.0
9.4

1.7

6.7
54.6

12.5
27.6

1.5
1.5
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.0

2014

3.0
3.0
3.0

20.7
15.0
9.5

1.7

6.7
54.6

12.5
27.6

1.5
1.5
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.0

2015

3.0
3.0
3.0

20.7
15.0
9.6

1.7

6.7
54.6

12.5
27.6

1.5
1.5
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.0

2016

3.0
3.0
3.0

20.7
15.0
9.7

1.7

6.7
54.6

12.5
27.6

1.5
1.5
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.0

2017

3.0
3.0
3.0

20.7
15.0
9.8

1.7

6.7
54.6

12.5
27.6

1.5
1.5
3.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
3.0

2018

272

1

937
(938)
(1,124)
(1,124)
5,670
7.7%
437
937
(437)
501
9,822
7.7%
756
937
(756)
181

Free cash flow
NOPLAT
Increase in operating invested capital
Investment in goodwill
Free cash flow

Economic profit (before goodwill)
Invested (beginning of year)
WACC (percent)
Annual capital charge

NOPLAT
Annual capital charge
Economic profit (before goodwill)

Economic profit (after goodwill)
Invested capital (beginning of year)
WACC (percent)
Annual capital charge

NOPLAT
Annual capital charge
Economic profit (after goodwill)

For 2003, used end of year invested capital due to acquisitions.

9,255
1,274
(337)
937

9,822

617
5,053
5,670
1,093
3,059

Revenues
Adjusted EBITA
Cash taxes on EBITA
NOPLAT

Invested capital
Operating working capital
Tangible fixed assets
Invested capital
Goodwill
Cumulative goodwill
written off and amortized
Invested capital
(after goodwill)

Historical
20031
733
784
6,003 6,423
6,736 7,208
1,766 1,954
3,192 3,287

2006
831
6,809
7,640
2,073
3,396

2007
873
7,149
8,022
2,113
3,517

2008
904
7,364
8,267
1,985
3,645

2009
931
7,585
8,515
1,857
3,773

2010
959
7,812
8,771
1,729
3,901

2011
987
8,047
9,034
1,601
4,029

2012

2014

1,017 1,048
8,288 8,537
9,305 9,584
1,473 1,345
4,157 4,285

2013
2016
2017

2018

1,179
1,079 1,111 1,145
9,608
8,793 9,057 9,328
9,872 10,168 10,473 10,787
833
961
1,217 1,089
4,797
4,413 4,541 4,669

2015

6,237
7.5%
468
6,736
7.5%
505
7,640
7.5%
573
8,022
7.5%
602

1,137 1,191 1,221
(541) (573) (602)
619
597
618

7,208
7.5%
541

8,515
7.5%
639

8,771
7.5%
658
1,257 1,295 1,334
(620) (639) (658)
637
656
676

8,267
7.5%
620

9,305
7.5%
698
1,374 1,415
(678) (698)
696
717

9,034
7.5%
678

1,457
(719)
739

9,584
7.5%
719

1,593
(314)
0
1,278

1,501 1,546
(740) (763)
761
784

1,593
(785)
807

9,872 10,168 10,473
7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
785
740
763

1,137 1,191 1,221 1,257 1,295 1,334 1,374 1,415 1,457 1,501 1,546
(248) (255) (263)
(432) (382) (245)
(271) (279)
(288)
(296) (305)
0
0
0
0
0
(228) (161)
0
0
0
0
648
975 1,009 1,039 1,071 1,103 1,136 1,170 1,205 1,241
477

937 1,008 1,075
(737) (815) (877)
201
193
198

1,593
1,137 1,191 1,221 1,257 1,295 1,334 1,374 1,415 1,457 1,501 1,546
(934) (983) (1,024) (1,042) (1,061) (1,080) (1,100) (1,120) (1,141) (1,163) (1,185) (1,208)
385
197
316
215
339
234
361
254
203
274
208
295

9,822 10,867 11,694 12,449 13,109 13,652 13,897 14,145 14,401 14,664 14,935 15,214 15,502 15,798 16,103
7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
7.5% 7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
7.5% 7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
7.5%
737
815
877
934
983 1,024 1,042 1,061 1,080 1,100 1,120 1,141 1,163 1,185 1,208

937 1,008 1,075
(425) (468) (505)
512
540
570

5,670
7.5%
425

937 1,008 1,075
(567) (499) (472)
(478) (328) (284)
(107)
181
320

10,181 10,995 11,765 12,470 13,094 13,487 13,891 14,308 14,737 15,180 15,635 16,104 16,587 17,085 17,597
2,200
1,290 1,389 1,483 1,569 1,645 1,686 1,736 1,789 1,842 1,897 1,954 2,013 2,073 2,136
(607)
(353) (381) (408)
(479) (494) (508)
(572) (589)
(432) (454) (465)
(524) (539)
(556)
937 1,008 1,075 1,137 1,191 1,221 1,257 1,295 1,334 1,374 1,415 1,457 1,501 1,546 1,593

10,867 11,694 12,449 13,109 13,652 13,897 14,145 14,401 14,664 14,935 15,214 15,502 15,798 16,103 16,417

679
5,558
6,237
1,516
3,114

Forecast
2004 2005

Exhibit 8.24 Heineken: Forecast Medium-Term Financial Results

REVIEW QUESTIONS

273

Exhibit 8.25 Heineken: Business as Usual Scenario Summary
percent
Historical
1999–2002

2003

Forecast
2004 2005–2008

Turnover growth
Organic
Acquisitions
Other
Turnover growth

5.3
6.7
1.5
13.5

5.0
8.0
(10.3)
2.7

3.0
8.0
(1.0)
10.0

3.0
3.7
0.0
6.7

3.0
0.0
0.0
3.0

Adjusted EBITA growth
Invested capital growth
Adjusted EBITA/revenues
Turnovers/invested capital (times)
Tax rate on EBITA
ROIC (after tax, before goodwill)
ROIC (after tax, after goodwill)

15.8
14.9
13.8
1.9
30.5
19.6
13.2

(1.7)
17.1
13.8
1.6
26.4
16.5
9.5

1.3
10.0
12.7
1.7
27.4
15.7
9.1

6.3
6.0
12.6
1.7
27.5
15.4
8.9

3.0
3.0
12.5
1.7
27.6
15.0
9.4

WACC

8.3

7.7

7.5

7.5

7.5

2009–2018

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Identify the six-step process for creating a valuation forecast. What is
the most important step in this process? Explain.
2. What is the benefit of a short-term performance forecast? What is the
benefit of a long-term performance forecast? How might a manager
combine the benefits of both short-term and long-term performance
forecasts to develop a more accurate value forecast?
3. Identify and explain the benefits of a bottom-up forecast process.
Identify and explain the benefits of a top-down forecast process.
Which process would likely provide a company better results?
4. Identify the differences between a marginal tax rate, an average tax
rate, and an operating tax rate. Which tax rate is most appropriate for
performance forecasting?
5. Discuss how capital structure affects corporate valuation. Use the
enterprise DCF model to illustrate your position.
6. It has been said repeatedly that adding value translates to ROIC
being greater than WACC. How does this result from the competitive
advantages of strategic positioning?

273

274

FORECASTING PERFORMANCE

7. Given the historical data, construct the following two scenarios for
IMT’s valuation:
Aggressive (AG): IMT introduces significant changes and increases to its product line and ability to meet technological change
in the industry. Goal: Improve all expense structures at high levels of
sales growth over the near term; Operating Expense/Sales of 74 percent, 73 percent, 73 percent for three years, SG&A/Sales of 16 percent, three years of sales growth of 40 percent per year.
Conservative (CO): IMT is barely able to hold its own in the global
arena of faster paced technological change and customer demands.
Goal: maintain historical sales, operating and general expense structures;
Operating Expense/Sales of 74 percent in perpetuity, SG&A/Sales
of 19 percent, three years of sales growth at 20 percent per year.
International Machine Tools Inc. (IMT):

Current assets
Current liabilities
Debt in current liabilities
Long-term debt
Total assets
Capital expenditures
Change in deferred taxes
Sales
Operating expenses
General expenses
Depreciation
Investment income
Interest expense
Miscellaneous income, net
Income taxes

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

499
240
25
218
686
34
4
851
626
151
23
4
22
3
18

489
236
12
200
693
34
(5)
838
624
157
24
2
20
(33)
4

443
255
7
244
598
16
3
754
579
132
24
2
19
(75)
10

429
237
21
207
579
18
2
789
592
134
21
3
19
–
11

484
369
78
236
730
23
2
1,029
765
191
26
2
16
(70)
8

9
Estimating
ContinuingValue
As described in Chapter 5, the concept of continuing value (CV) provides a
useful method for simplifying company valuations. To estimate a company’s value, we separate a company’s expected cash flow into two periods
and define the company’s value as follows:

Value =

Present Value of Cash Flow
Present Value of Cash Flow
+
during Explicit Forecast Period after Explicit Forecast Period

The second term is the continuing value: the value of the company’s expected cash flow beyond the explicit forecast period. Making simplifying
assumptions about the company’s performance during this period (e.g., assuming a constant rate of growth and return on capital), we can estimate
continuing value by using formulas instead of explicitly forecasting and
discounting cash flows over an extended period.
A thoughtful estimate of continuing value is essential to any valuation
because continuing value often accounts for a large percentage of a company’s total value. Exhibit 9.1 on page 276 shows continuing value as a percentage of total value for companies in four industries, given an eight-year
explicit forecast. In these examples, continuing value accounts for 56 percent to 125 percent of total value. These large percentages do not necessarily
mean that most of a company’s value will be created in the continuingvalue period. Often continuing value is large because profits and other inflows in the early years are offset by outflows for capital spending and
working capital investment—investments that should generate higher cash
275

276

ESTIMATING CONTINUING VALUE

Exhibit 9.1 Continuing Value as a Percentage of Total Value
Eight-year forecast period, percent
125
Forecast period cash flow
Continuing value

100
81

56
44

19
0

Tobacco

Sporting

Skin

(25)
High

goods

care

tech

flow in later years. We discuss the interpretation of continuing value in
more detail later in this chapter.
This chapter begins with the recommended continuing-value formulas
for discounted cash flow (DCF) and economic profit valuation. We then discuss issues commonly raised about how to interpret continuing value and
suggest some best practices in estimating continuing-value parameters such
as growth and return on invested capital. Finally, we compare the recommended formulas with other continuing-value techniques and discuss more
advanced formulas.
The continuing-value formulas developed over the next few pages are
consistent with the frameworks for discounted cash flow and economic
profit. This is important because continuing value is sometimes treated as
though it differs from the discounted cash flow of the explicit forecast period. For example, some acquirers estimate continuing value for a target
company by applying the same price-to-earnings multiple five years in the
future as the multiple they are currently paying for the target. By doing
this, they are assuming that someone would be willing to pay the same
multiple for the target company five years from now, regardless of changes
in growth and return prospects over that period. This type of circular reasoning leads to inaccurate valuations. Instead, acquirers should try to estimate what the multiple should be at the end of the forecast period, given
the industry conditions at that time.

RECOMMENDED FORMULA FOR DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW

277

RECOMMENDED FORMULA FOR DISCOUNTED
CASH FLOW VALUATION
If you are using the enterprise DCF model, you should estimate continuing
value by using the value driver formula derived in Chapter 3:

Continuing Valuet =

g 

NOPLATt + 1  1 −


RONIC 
WACC − g

where NOPLATt+1 = Normalized level of NOPLAT in the first year after the
explicit forecast period
g = Expected growth rate in NOPLAT in perpetuity
RONIC = Expected rate of return on new invested capital
WACC = Weighted average cost of capital
A simple example demonstrates that the value driver formula does, in
fact, replicate the process of projecting the cash flows and discounting them
to the present. Begin with the following cash flow projections:
Year
1

2

3

4

5

NOPLAT
Net investment

$100
50

$106
53

$112
56

$119
60

$126
63

Free cash flow

$150

$153

$156

$160

$163

The same pattern continues after the first five years presented. In this example, the growth rate in NOPLAT and free cash flow each period is 6 percent. The rate of return on net new investment is 12 percent, calculated as
the increase in NOPLAT from one year to the next, divided by the net investment in the prior year. The WACC is assumed to be 11 percent. First,
discount a long forecast—say, 150 years:
50 (1.06)
50
53
56
... +
+
2 +
3 +
1.11 (1.11) (1.11)
(1.11)150

149

CV =

CV = 999

Next, use the growing free cash flow perpetuity formula:
CV =

50
11% − 6%

CV = 1, 000

278

ESTIMATING CONTINUING VALUE

Finally, use the value driver formula:

CV =

6% 

100  1 −


12% 
11% − 6%

CV = 1,000

All three approaches yield the same result. (If we had carried out the
discounted cash flow beyond 150 years, the result would have been
the same.)
Although the value driver formula and the growing free cash flow (FCF)
perpetuity formula are technically equivalent, applying the FCF perpetuity
is tricky, and it is easy to make a common conceptual error. The typical
error is to incorrectly estimate the level of free cash flow that is consistent
with the growth rate you are forecasting. If growth in the continuing-value
period is forecast to be less than the growth in the explicit forecast period
(as is normally the case), then the proportion of NOPLAT that must be invested to generate growth also is likely to be less. In the continuing-value
period, more of each dollar of NOPLAT becomes free cash flow available
for the investors. If this transition is not explicitly taken into consideration,
the continuing value could be significantly underestimated. Later in this
chapter, we provide an example that illustrates what can go wrong when
using the value driver formula.
Because perpetuity-based formulas rely on parameters that never
change, use a continuing-value formula only when the company has reached
a steady state, with constant growth, margins, capital turnover, and WACC.
Chapter 6 provided guidance for thinking about long-term growth and return on capital. In addition, when estimating the continuing-value parameters, keep in mind the following technical considerations:
• NOPLAT: The level of NOPLAT should be based on a normalized level
of revenues and sustainable margin and ROIC. The normalized level
of revenues should reflect the midpoint of its business cycle and cycle
average profit margins.
• RONIC: The expected rate of return on new invested capital (RONIC)
should be consistent with expected competitive conditions. Economic theory suggests that competition will eventually eliminate abnormal returns, so for many companies, set RONIC equal to WACC.
However, for companies with sustainable competitive advantages
(e.g., brands and patents), you might set RONIC equal to the return
the company is forecast to earn during later years of the explicit fore-

RECOMMENDED FORMULA FOR DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW

279

cast period. Chapter 6 contains data on the long-term returns on capital for companies in different industries.
• Growth rate: Few companies can be expected to grow faster than the
economy for long periods. The best estimate is probably the expected long-term rate of consumption growth for the industry’s
products, plus inflation. Sensitivity analyses also are useful for understanding how the growth rate affects continuing-value estimates. Again, Chapter 6 provides empirical evidence on historical
corporate growth rates.
• WACC: The weighted average cost of capital should incorporate a sustainable capital structure and an underlying estimate of business
risk consistent with expected industry conditions.
The key value driver formula is highly sensitive to the formula’s parameters. Exhibit 9.2 shows how continuing value (calculated using the value
driver formula) is affected by various combinations of growth rate and rate
of return on new investment. The example assumes a $100 million base level
of NOPLAT and a 10 percent WACC. At a 14 percent expected rate of return
on new capital, changing the growth rate from 6 percent to 8 percent increases the continuing value by 50 percent, from about $1.4 billion to about
$2.1 billion.

Exhibit 9.2 Impact of Continuing-Value Assumptions
WACC = 10 percent; NOPLAT = $100 million

Continuing value ($ million)

3,000

g = 8 percent

2,000
g = 6 percent
g = 4 percent
1,000

0
10

12

14

16

Return on net new invested capital (percent)

18

20

280

ESTIMATING CONTINUING VALUE

RECOMMENDED FORMULA FOR ECONOMIC PROFIT VALUATION
With the economic profit approach, the continuing value does not equal the
value of the company following the explicit forecast period. Instead, it is the
incremental value over the company’s invested capital at the end of the explicit forecast period. The total value of the company is as follows:

Value =

Invested Capital Present Value of Forecasted Present Value of Forecasted
at Beginning + Economic Profit during + Economic Profit after the
Explicit Forecast Period
Explicit Forecast Period
of Forecast

The economic profit continuing value is the last term in the preceding equation. Although this continuing value differs from the DCF continuing value,
the value of the company will be the same, given the same projected financial performance.
The economic profit formula* is:

CVt =

Economic Profit t+1
WACC

+

g 

(RONIC − WACC)
(NOPLATt+1 ) 
 RONIC 
WACC(WACC − g)

where Economic profitt+1 = Normalized economic profit in the first year
after the explicit forecast period
NOPLATt+1 = Normalized NOPLAT in the first year after the
explicit forecast period
g = Expected growth rate in NOPLAT in perpetuity
RONIC = Expected rate of return on net new invested
capital
WACC = Weighted average cost of capital
According to the formula, total economic profit following the explicit forecast equals the present value of economic profit in the first year after the explicit forecast in perpetuity, plus any incremental economic profit after that
year. Incremental economic profit is created by additional growth at returns exceeding the cost of capital. If expected RONIC equals WACC, the
second half of the equation equals zero, and the continuing economic profit
value is the value of the first year’s economic profit in perpetuity.
DCF-based and economic-profit-based continuing values are directly
related but not identical. The continuing value using a DCF will equal the
sum of the economic profit continuing value plus the amount of invested
capital in place at the end of the explicit forecast period.
* See footnote 7 on page 121 for the derivation.

SUBTLETIES OF CONTINUING VALUE

281

SUBTLETIES OF CONTINUING VALUE
Three misunderstandings about continuing value are common. First is the
misperception that the length of the explicit forecast affects the company’s
value. Second, there is confusion about the relationship of continuing value
to the length of time a company is forecast to earn returns on invested capital greater than its cost of capital—its competitive advantage period. Finally, some analysts incorrectly infer that a large continuing value relative
to the company’s total value implies that value creation occurs primarily
after the explicit forecast period.

Does the Length of Forecast Affect the Company’s Value?
While the length of the explicit forecast period you choose is important, it
does not affect the value of the company; it only affects the distribution of
the company’s value between the explicit forecast period and the years that
follow. In Exhibit 9.3, the company value is $893, regardless of how long the
forecast period is. Exhibit 9.4 on page 282 details the calculations for the
first two scenarios. With a forecast horizon of five years, the present value
of the continuing value accounts for 79 percent of total value. With a 10-year
horizon, the present value of continuing value accounts for only 60 percent
of total value.
The choice of forecast horizon will indirectly affect value if it is associated with changes in the economic assumptions underlying the continuingvalue estimate. You can unknowingly change your performance forecasts
when you change your forecast horizon. Many forecasters assume that the
rate of return on new invested capital will equal the cost of capital in the

Exhibit 9.3 Comparison of Total Value Estimates Based on
Different Forecast Horizons
percent
100 percent = $893
79
Continuing value

$893

$893
60

$893
46

$893
35

26

74
65
54
40
Value of explicit

21

free cash flow
Horizon 5-year

10-year

15-year

20-year

25-year

282

ESTIMATING CONTINUING VALUE

Exhibit 9.4 Comparison of Total Value Calculations for
5-Year and 10-Year Horizons
$ million
5-year horizon
NOPLAT
Depreciation
Gross cash flow
Gross investment
FCF

1
100.0
20.0
120.0
76.3
43.8

2
109.0
21.8
130.8
83.1
47.7

3
118.8
23.8
142.6
90.6
52.0

4
129.5
25.9
155.4
98.7
56.7

5
141.2
28.2
169.4
107.6
61.8

Base
for CV
149.6

Overall
assumptions
(percent)
Years 1–5
Return on
16
investment (RONIC)
Growth rate (g)
9
WACC
12

Years 6+
12
6
12

Discount factor
0.893
Present value of cash flow 39.1

0.797 0.712 0.636 0.567
38.0
37.0
36.0
35.0
NOPLAT (1 – g/RONIC)
5 $149.6 (1 – 6%/12%)
Present value of continuing value =
[1 / (1 + WACC)] =
(0.5674) = $707.5
WACC – g
12% – 6%
Present value of FCF 1 – 5 185.1
Continuing value
707.5
Total value
892.6
Base
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 for CV
109.0 118.8 129.5 141.2 149.6 158.6 168.1 178.2 188.9 200.2
21.8
23.8
25.9
28.2
29.9
31.7
33.6
35.6
37.8
130.8 142.6 155.4 169.4 179.6 190.3 201.7 213.9 226.7
83.1
90.6
98.7 107.6 104.7 111.0 117.7 124.7 132.2
47.7
52.0
56.7
61.8
74.8
79.3
84.1
89.1
94.5
0.797 0.712 0.636 0.567 0.507 0.452 0.404 0.361 0.322
38.0
37.0
36.0
35.0
37.9
35.9
34.0
32.1
30.4
NOPLAT (1 – g/RONIC)
10 $200.2 (1 – 6%/12%)
Present value of continuing value =
[1 / (1 + WACC)] =
(0.322) = $537.2
WACC – g
12% – 6%
10-year horizon
1
NOPLAT
100.0
Depreciation
20.0
Gross cash flow
120.0
Gross investment
76.3
FCF
43.8
Discount factor
0.893
Present value of cash flow 39.1

Present value of FCF 1–10 355.4
Continuing value
537.2
Total value
892.6

continuing-value period but that the company will earn returns exceeding
the cost of capital during the explicit forecast period. By extending the explicit forecast period, you also implicitly extend the time period during
which returns on new capital are expected to exceed the cost of capital.
Therefore, extending the forecast period indirectly raises the value.
So how do you choose the appropriate length of the explicit forecast period? The explicit forecast should be long enough that the business will
have reached a steady state by the end of the period. Suppose you expect the
company’s margins to decline as its customers become more powerful. Margins are currently 12 percent, and you forecast they will fall to 9 percent
over the next seven years. In this case, the explicit forecast period must be at
least seven years, because continuing-value approaches cannot account for
the declining margin (at least not without complex computations). The business must be operating at an equilibrium level for the continuing-value approaches to be useful. If the explicit forecast is more than seven years, there
will be no effect on the total value of the company.

SUBTLETIES OF CONTINUING VALUE

283

Confusion about Competitive Advantage Period
A related issue is the concept of a company’s competitive advantage period,
or period of supernormal returns. This is the notion that companies will
earn returns above the cost of capital for a period of time, followed by a decline to the cost of capital. While this concept is useful, linking it to the
length of the forecast is dangerous. One reason is simply that, as we just
showed, there is no direct connection between the length of the forecast and
the value of a company.
More important is that the length of competitive advantage is sometimes inappropriately linked to the explicit forecast period. Remember, the
key value driver formula is based on incremental returns on capital, not companywide average returns. If you assume that incremental returns in the
continuing-value period will just equal the cost of capital, you are not assuming that the return on total capital (old and new) will equal the cost of
capital. The original capital (prior to the continuing value period) will continue to earn the returns projected in the last forecast period. In other
words, the company’s competitive advantage period has not come to an end
once the continuing-value period is reached. Exhibit 9.5 shows the implied
average ROIC, assuming that projected continuing-value growth is 4.5 percent, the return on base capital is 18 percent, the return on new capital
(RONIC) is 10 percent, and the WACC is 10 percent. The average return on
all capital declines gradually. From its starting point at 18 percent, it declines to 14 percent (the halfway point to the RONIC) after 11 years. It
reaches 12 percent after 23 years and 11 percent after 37 years.

Exhibit 9.5 Average ROIC Declines Gradually Using ContinuingValue Formula
18

ROIC on
base capital

16

ROIC (percent)

14
12

ROIC on
total capital

10

RONIC

8
6
4
2
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
Year

284

ESTIMATING CONTINUING VALUE

When Is Value Created?
Executives often state uncomfortably that “all the value is in the continuing
value.” Exhibit 9.6 illustrates the problem for Innovation Inc. It appears that
85 percent of Innovation’s value comes from the continuing value. But there
are other ways to interpret the source of value.
Exhibit 9.7 suggests an alternative: a business components approach.
Innovation Inc. has a base business that earns a steady 12 percent return
on capital and is growing at 4 percent per year. It also has developed a new
product line that will require several years of negative cash flow for construction of a new plant. As shown in Exhibit 9.7, the base business has a
value of $877, or 71 percent of Innovation’s total value. So 71 percent of the
company’s value comes from operations that are currently generating
strong cash flow. But the company has decided to reinvest this cash flow in
a profitable new product line. This does not mean that 85 percent of
the value is more than eight years out. It just means that the cash flow pattern mechanically results in the appearance that most of the value is a long
way off.
We can use the economic profit model to generate another interpretation of continuing value. Exhibit 9.8 compares the components of value for
Innovation Inc., using the two interpretations discussed earlier as well as
the economic profit model. Under the economic profit model, 62 percent of
Innovation’s value is simply its invested capital. The rest of the value is the
present value of projected economic profit (8 percent for economic profit before year 9 and 30 percent for economic profit after year 9).

Exhibit 9.6 Innovation, Inc.: Free Cash Flow Forecast and Valuation
$1,235
1,050 (85 percent)
Present value
of continuing
value

150

Free cash flow

100
50
0
–50
–100
–150
1
Year

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

185 (15 percent)
Value of years 1–9
free cash flow
DCF value
at 11 percent

COMMON PITFALLS

285

Exhibit 9.7 Innovation, Inc.: Valuation by Components
Total free cash flow

$1,235
358 (29 percent)
New product
line

150
Free cash flow from
new product line

Free cash flow

100
50

877 (71 percent)
Base
business

Base business
free cash flow

0
–50
–100

–150
1
Year

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

DCF value at 11 percent

COMMON PITFALLS
Estimating a company’s performance 10 to 15 years out is not a precise process. Common mistakes in estimating continuing value include naive baseyear extrapolation and both naive and purposeful conservatism.

Naive Base-Year Extrapolation
Exhibit 9.9 on page 286 illustrates a common error in forecasting the base
level of free cash flow: assuming that the investment rate is constant, so
NOPLAT, investment, and FCF all grow at the same rate. From year 9 to

Exhibit 9.8 Innovation, Inc.: Comparison of Continuing Values
$1,235
1,050 (85 percent)
Present value
of continuing
value

$1,235
358 (29 percent)
New product line
877 (71 percent)
Base business

185 (15 percent)
Value of years 1–9
free cash flow
Free cash flow
approach

Business components
approach

$1,235
364 (30 percent)
Economic profit
continuing value
104 (8 percent)
PV of years 1–9
economic profit
767 (62 percent)
Invested capital at
beginning of year 1

Economic profit
approach

286

ESTIMATING CONTINUING VALUE

Exhibit 9.9 Right and Wrong Ways to Forecast the Base Free Cash Flow
Year 11 (5 percent growth)
Year 9

Year 10

Incorrect

Correct

1,000
(850)
150
(60)
90
27
117

1,100
(935)
165
(66)
99
30
129

1,155
(982)
173
(69)
104
32
136

1,155
(982)
173
(69)
104
32
136

Capital expenditures
Increase in working capital
Gross investment

30
27
57

33
30
63

35
32
67

35
17
52

Free cash flow
Memo: year-end working capital
Working capital/sales (percent)
Increase in working capital/sales (percent)

60
300
30
2.7

66
330
30
2.7

69
362
31
2.7

84
347
30
1.5

Sales
Operating expenses
EBIT
Cash taxes
NOPLAT
Depreciation
Gross cash flow

year 10 (the last forecast year), the company’s earnings and cash flow grow
by 10 percent. The forecast suggests that growth in the continuing-value
period will be 5 percent per year. A naive, and incorrect, forecast for year
11 (the continuing-value base year) simply increases every cash flow from
year 10 by 5 percent, as shown in the third column. This forecast is wrong
because the increase in working capital is far too large, given the projected
increase in sales. Since sales are growing more slowly, the proportion of
gross cash flow devoted to increasing working capital should decline significantly, as shown in the last column. In the final column, the increase in
working capital should be the amount necessary to maintain the year-end
working capital at a constant percentage of sales. The naive approach continually increases working capital as a percentage of sales and will significantly understate the value of the company. Note that in the third column,
free cash flow is 18 percent lower than it should be. The same problem applies to capital expenditures, though we limited the example to working
capital to keep it simple. Using the value driver formula automatically
avoids the problem of naive base-year extrapolation.

Naive Overconservatism
Many financial analysts routinely assume that the incremental return on
capital during the continuing-value period will equal the cost of capital. This
practice relieves them of having to forecast a growth rate, since growth in
this case neither adds nor destroys value. For some businesses, this assumption is too conservative. For example, both Coca-Cola’s and PepsiCo’s soft-

EVALUATING OTHER APPROACHES TO CONTINUING VALUE

287

drink businesses earn high returns on invested capital, and their returns are
unlikely to fall substantially as they continue to grow due to the strength of
their brands. An assumption that RONIC equals WACC for these businesses
would substantially understate their values. This problem applies equally to
almost any business selling a product or service that is unlikely to be duplicated, including many pharmaceutical companies, consumer products companies, and some software companies.

Purposeful Overconservatism
Analysts sometimes are overly conservative because of the uncertainty and
size of the continuing value. But, if continuing value is to be estimated
properly, the uncertainty should cut both ways: The results are just as likely
to be higher than an unbiased estimate as they are to be lower. So conservatism overcompensates for uncertainty. Uncertainty matters, but it should
be modeled using scenarios, and not through conservatism.

EVALUATING OTHER APPROACHES TO CONTINUING VALUE
Several alternative approaches to continuing value are used in practice, often
with misleading results. A few approaches are acceptable if used carefully,
but we prefer the methods recommended earlier because they explicitly rely
on the underlying economic assumptions embodied in the company analysis. Other approaches tend to hide the underlying economic assumptions.
Exhibit 9.10 illustrates, for a sporting goods company, the wide dispersion
of continuing-value estimates arrived at by different techniques. This section explains why we prefer the recommended approaches. We classify the
most common techniques into two categories: (1) other DCF approaches, and
(2) non-cash-flow approaches.

Exhibit 9.10 Continuing-Value Estimates for a Sporting Goods Company

Technique

Assumptions

Book value
Liquidation value

Per accounting records
80 percent of working capital
70 percent of net fixed assets
Industry average of 15X
Industry average of 1.4X
Book value adjusted for inflation
Normalized FCF growing at inflation rate

Price-to-earnings ratio
Market-to-book ratio
Replacement cost
Perpetuity based on final year's cash flow

Continuing value
($ million)
268
186
624
375
275
428

288

ESTIMATING CONTINUING VALUE

Other Discounted Cash Flow Approaches
The recommended DCF formulas can be modified to derive additional
continuing-value formulas with more restrictive (and sometimes unreasonable) assumptions.
One variation is the convergence formula. For many companies in competitive industries, we expect the return on net new investment to eventually converge to the cost of capital as all the excess profits are competed
away. This assumption allows a simpler version of the value driver formula,
as follows:
CV =

NOPLATt +1
WACC

The derivation begins with the value driver formula:
g 

NOPLATt +1  1 −


RONIC 
CV =
WACC − g

Assume that RONIC = WACC (that is, the return on incremental invested
capital equals the cost of capital):

CV =

CV =

g


NOPLATt+1  1 −


WACC 
WACC – g
 WACC − g 
NOPLATt+1 
 WACC 
WACC – g

Canceling the term WACC − g leaves a simple formula:
CV =

NOPLATt+1
WACC

The fact that the growth term has disappeared from the equation does
not mean that the nominal growth in NOPLAT will be zero. The growth
term drops out because new growth adds nothing to value, as the return

EVALUATING OTHER APPROACHES TO CONTINUING VALUE

289

associated with growth equals the cost of capital. This formula is sometimes interpreted as implying zero growth (not even with inflation), but
this is not the case.
Misinterpretation of the convergence formula has led to another variant: the aggressive-growth formula. This formula assumes that earnings in
the continuing-value period will grow at some rate, most often the inflation rate. The conclusion is then drawn that earnings should be discounted
at the real WACC rather than the nominal WACC. The resulting formula is
as follows:
CV =

NOPLATt+1
WACC − g

Here, g is the inflation rate. This formula can substantially overstate
continuing value because it assumes that NOPLAT can grow without
any incremental capital investment. This is unlikely (or impossible), because any growth will probably require additional working capital and
fixed assets.
To see how this formula relates to the key value driver formula, assume that the return on incremental capital investment (RONIC) approaches infinity:

CV =

g 

NOPLATt+1  1 −


RONIC 
WACC − g

RONIC → ∞ therefore
CV =
CV =

g

RONIC
NOPLATt+1 (1 − 0)

→0

WACC − g
NOPLATt+1
WACC − g

Exhibit 9.11 on page 290 compares the two variations of the key value driver
formula. This exhibit shows how the average return on invested capital
( both existing and new investment) behaves under the two assumptions. In
the aggressive-growth case, NOPLAT grows without any new investment,
so the return on invested capital eventually approaches infinity. In the convergence case, the average return on invested capital moves toward the
weighted average cost of capital as new capital becomes a larger portion of
the total capital base.

290

ESTIMATING CONTINUING VALUE

Exhibit 9.11 Rates of Return Implied by Alternative ContinuingValue Formulas
Average
ROIC

WACC

Forecast period

CV =

NOPLAT
WACC – g

CV =

NOPLAT
WACC

Continuing
value period

Non-Cash-Flow Approaches
In addition to DCF techniques, non-cash-flow approaches to continuing
value are sometimes used. Three common approaches are multiples, liquidation value, and replacement cost.

Multiples
Multiples approaches assume that a company will be worth some multiple
of future earnings or book value in the continuing period. But how do you
estimate an appropriate future multiple?
A common approach is to assume that the company will be worth a multiple of earnings or book value based on the multiple for the company today.
Suppose we choose today’s current industry average price-to-earnings
(P/E) ratio. This ratio reflects the economic prospects of the industry during the explicit forecast period as well as the continuing-value period. In
maturing industries, however, prospects at the end of the explicit forecast
period are likely to be very different from today’s. Therefore, we need a different P/E ratio that reflects the company’s prospects at the end of the forecast period. What factors will determine that ratio? As discussed in
Chapter 3, the primary determinants are the company’s expected growth,
the rate of return on new capital, and the cost of capital. The same factors
are in the key value driver formula. Unless you are comfortable using an arbitrary P/E ratio, you are much better off with the value driver formula.
When valuing an acquisition, companies sometimes fall into the circular
reasoning that the P/E ratio for the continuing value should equal the P/E

ADVANCED FORMULAS FOR CONTINUING VALUE

291

ratio paid for the acquisition. In other words, if I pay 18 times earnings
today, I should be able to sell the business for 18 times earnings at the end of
the explicit forecast period. In most cases, the reason a company is willing
to pay a particular P/E for an acquisition is that it plans to improve the target’s earnings. So the effective P/E it is paying on the improved level of
earnings will be much less than 18. Once the improvements are in place and
earnings are higher, buyers will not be willing to pay the same P/E unless
they can make additional improvements. Chapter 12 describes other common mistakes made when using multiples.

Liquidation Value
The liquidation value approach sets the continuing value equal to the estimated proceeds from the sale of the assets, after paying off liabilities at
the end of the explicit forecast period. Liquidation value is often far different from the value of the company as a going concern. In a growing,
profitable industry, a company’s liquidation value is probably well below
the going-concern value. In a dying industry, liquidation value may exceed
going-concern value. Do not use this approach unless liquidation is likely
at the end of the forecast period.

Replacement Cost
The replacement cost approach sets the continuing value equal to the expected cost to replace the company’s assets. This approach has several
drawbacks. First, not all tangible assets are replaceable. The company’s organizational capital can be valued only on the basis of the cash flow the company generates. The replacement cost of just the company’s tangible assets
may greatly understate the value of the company.
Second, not all the company’s assets will ever be replaced. Consider a
machine used only by this particular industry. As long as it generates a positive cash flow, the asset is valuable to the ongoing business of the company.
But the replacement cost of the asset may be so high that replacing it is not
economical. Here, the replacement cost may exceed the value of the business as an ongoing entity.

ADVANCED FORMULAS FOR CONTINUING VALUE
In certain situations, you may want to break up the continuing-value (CV)
period into two periods with different growth and ROIC assumptions. You
might assume that during the first eight years after the explicit forecast period, the company will grow at 8 percent per year and earn an incremental
ROIC of 15 percent. After those eight years, the company’s growth rate will

292

ESTIMATING CONTINUING VALUE

slow to 5 percent, and incremental ROIC will drop to 11 percent. In a situation such as this, you can use a two-stage variation of the value driver formula for DCF valuations:


gA

 NOPLATt + 1  1 − RONIC   
N

 1 + gA  
A 
CV = 
1− 

   1 + WACC  

WACC − gA






gB

N 
 NOPLATt+1 (1 + gA )  1 − RONIC  

B 
+
N


(WACC − gB )(1 + WACC)





where

N = Number of years in the first stage of the CV period
gA = Expected growth rate in the first stage of the CV period
gB = Expected growth rate in the second stage of the CV period
RONICA = Expected incremental ROIC during the first stage of the
CV period
RONICB = Expected incremental ROIC during the second stage of
the CV period

Note that gB must be less than WACC for this formula to be valid. (Otherwise the company would eventually take over the entire world economy.)
A two-stage variation can also be used for the economic profit
continuing-value formula:1

CV =

Economic Profit t+1
WACC


gA


 NOPLATt + 1  RONIC  ( RONICA − WACC )  
1 + gA  N 
A
 1 − 
+

   1 + WACC  
WACC ( WACC − gA )






+

1



gB
NOPLAT (1 + gA )N 
( RONICB − WACC)
 RONICB 
WACC (WACC − gB )(1 + WACC)N

Thanks to Pieter de Wit and David Krieger for deriving this formula.

ADVANCED FORMULAS FOR CONTINUING VALUE

293

These formulas always assume that the return on the base level of capital remains constant at the level of the last year of the explicit forecast.
If you want to model a decline in ROIC for all capital, including the base
level of capital, it is best to model this into the explicit forecast. It is difficult
to model changes in average ROIC with formulas because the growth rate in
revenues and NOPLAT will not equal the growth rate in FCF, and there are
multiple ways for the ROIC to decline. You could model declining ROIC by
setting the growth rate for capital and reducing NOPLAT over time (in
which case NOPLAT will grow much slower than capital). Or you could set
the growth rate for NOPLAT and adjust FCF each period (so FCF growth
again will be slower than NOPLAT growth). The dynamics of these relationships are complex, and we do not recommend embedding the dynamics
in continuing-value formulas, especially when the key value drivers become
less transparent.

HEINEKEN CASE
We used the value driver model to estimate Heineken’s DCF continuing value. For the
business-as-usual scenario, the values of the parameters are estimated as follows:
• The first year of the continuing-value period is 2019 (one year after the last
forecasted year). We project Heineken’s 2019 NOPLAT to be €1.641 billion.
• Heineken’s WACC is projected to remain at 7.5 percent. We do not foresee any
significant change in Heineken’s target capital structure or business risk.
• Heineken’s return on new invested capital before goodwill beyond 2018 is
forecast to be 15.0 percent. This is consistent with the forecast performance in
the years leading up to 2018 in this scenario. This forecast for RONIC implies
that Heineken, like other branded consumer product companies, owns brands
that will allow it to achieve returns above its cost of capital for a long time.
• We expect that Heineken’s NOPLAT will grow at 3 percent, based on 1.5 percent volume growth, 1.5 percent price increases, and constant margins. This
forecast for growth is less than nominal GDP growth but consistent with the
earlier years in the forecast.
By using these parameters in the recommended continuing-value formula, we obtain an estimated continuing value of €29.173 billion in 2018:
CV =

=

(

g

NOPLAT2019 1− RONIC
WACC − g
 3.0% 
1,641 1−
 15% 
7.5% − 3.0%

= €29.173 billion

)

294

ESTIMATING CONTINUING VALUE

Using the economic profit approach and the same parameters, we obtain a continuing value of economic profit after 2018 equal to €18.387 billion, calculated as follows:

CV of Economic Profit =

=

Economic Profit 2019
WACC
832
+
7.5%

+

 g 
NOPLAT2019 
(RONIC − WACC )
 RONIC 
WACC ( WACC − g )

 3.0% 
1,641
(15% − 7.5%)
 15% 
7.5% (7.5% − 3.0% )

= €18.387 billion

The continuing value is a large portion of Heineken’s value because Heineken is expected to earn more than its cost of capital during and after the explicit forecast. However, the economic profit continuing value is smaller than the DCF continuing value.
Adding the amount of invested capital at the end of 2018 to the continuing value of
economic profit gives a total continuing value of €29.173 billion, the same value calculated using the DCF approach:
CV = Invested capital2018 + CV of economic profit
= €10.787 billion + €18.387 billion
= €29.173 billion

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Identify three common errors executives make when estimating continuing value using the value driver formulas.
2. Identify and define four technical considerations to be analyzed
when estimating continuing value using the value driver formula.
3. A client explains that her firm’s value must be affected by the choice
of explicit forecast horizon. Build a model to test her claim. NOPLAT,
depreciation, and gross investment for year 1 have been forecasted to
be $10.0, $2.5, and $13.61, respectively.
a. To evaluate your client’s claim, first assume a short horizon of
three years.
b. Compare the results of this three-year horizon to a six-year forecasted horizon. The company’s management team forecasted
RONIC for years 1 to 3 to be 18 percent and 11 percent thereafter.
The company executives also forecasted NOPLAT to grow at 20
percent for years 1 to 3 and a decline to continuing growth rate of
5 percent thereafter. Finally, the management team has estimated

REVIEW QUESTIONS

295

an initial WACC of 14 percent for years 1 to 3, and declining to 12
percent after the initial forecasted period.
c. Compare your computed value for both time horizons. Provide an
explanation of your results.
4. Your client remains skeptical. Why use two different representations
of value: free cash flow and economic profit? Show her that the present value of economic profit plus beginning invested capital equals
the present value of free cash flows.
5. Demonstrate for your client the equivalence between the free cash
flow model and the economic profit model using the three-year horizon model described in question 4. Identify and discuss the similarities, differences and usefulness of each model.
6. Identify the strengths and weaknesses of the Enterprise DCF, Economic Profit, and Multiples approaches to estimating continuing
value.

10
Estimating the Cost
of Capital
To value a company using enterprise DCF, we discount free cash flow by the
weighted average cost of capital (WACC). The weighted average cost of capital represents the opportunity cost that investors face for investing their
funds in one particular business instead of others with similar risk.
The most important principle underlying successful implementation of
the cost of capital is consistency between the components of WACC and free
cash flow. Since free cash flow is the cash flow available to all financial investors (debt, equity, and hybrid securities), the company’s WACC must include the required return for each investor. In addition, the duration and
risk of the financial securities used to estimate the WACC must match that
of the free cash flow being discounted. To assure consistency, the cost of
capital must meet several criteria:
• It must include the opportunity costs from all sources of capital—
debt, equity, and so on—since free cash flow is available to all investors, who expect compensation for the risks they take.
• It must weight each security’s required return by its target marketbased weight, not by its historical book value.
• It must be computed after corporate taxes (since free cash flow is calculated in after-tax terms). Any financing-related tax shields not included in free cash flow must be incorporated into the cost of capital
or valued separately (as done in the adjusted present value).
• It must be denominated in the same currency as free cash flow.
• It must be denominated in nominal terms when cash flows are stated
in nominal terms.
For most companies, discounting free cash flow at the WACC is a simple, accurate, and robust method of corporate valuation. If, however, the
297

298

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

company’s target capital structure is expected to change significantly, for
instance in a leveraged buyout (LBO), a constant WACC can overstate (or
understate) the impact of interest tax shields. In this situation, discount free
cash flow at the unlevered cost of equity, described later in this chapter, and
value tax shields and other financing effects separately (as described in
Chapter 5).
To determine the weighted average cost of capital, calculate its three
components: the cost of equity, the after-tax cost of debt, and the company’s
target capital structure. Since none of the variables are directly observable,
we employ various models, assumptions, and approximations to estimate
each component.
In this chapter, we begin by defining the components of WACC and introducing the assumptions underlying these metrics. The next three sections detail how to estimate the cost of equity, cost of debt, and target capital
structure, respectively. The chapter concludes with a discussion of WACC
estimation when the company employs a complex capital structure, using
hybrid securities such as convertible debt.

WEIGHTED AVERAGE COST OF CAPITAL
In its simplest form, the weighted average cost of capital is the market-based
weighted average of the after-tax cost of debt and cost of equity:
WACC =

D
E
kd (1 − Tm ) + ke
V
V

where D/V = Target level of debt to enterprise value using market-based
(not book) values
E/V = Target level of equity to enterprise value using market-based
values
kd = Cost of debt
ke = Cost of equity
Tm = Company’s marginal income tax rate
For companies with other securities, such as preferred stock, additional
terms must be added to the cost of capital, representing each security’s expected rate of return and percentage of total enterprise value.
The cost of capital does not include expected returns of operating liabilities, such as accounts payable. Required compensation for funds from customers, suppliers, and employees is included in operating expenses, such as
cost of goods sold, so it is already incorporated in free cash flow. Including
operating liabilities in the WACC would incorrectly double-count their cost
of financing.

WEIGHTED AVERAGE COST OF CAPITAL

299

Exhibit 10.1 Home Depot: Weighted Average Cost of Capital
percent
Source of
capital
Debt
Equity
WACC

Proportion
of total
capital
8.3
91.7
100.0

Cost of
capital
4.7
9.9

Marginal
tax rate
38.2

After-tax
opportunity
cost
2.9
9.9

Contribution
to weighted
average
0.2
9.1
9.3

To determine the cost of equity, we rely on the capital asset pricing
model (CAPM), one of many theoretical models that convert a stock’s risk
into expected return.1 The CAPM uses three variables to determine a
stock’s expected return: the risk-free rate, the market risk premium (i.e.,
the expected return of the market over risk-free bonds), and the stock’s
beta. In the CAPM, beta measures a stock’s co-movement with the market
and represents the stock’s ability to further diversity the market portfolio.
Stocks with high betas must have excess returns that exceed the market risk
premium; the converse is true for low-beta stocks.
To approximate the cost of debt for an investment-grade firm, use the
company’s yield to maturity on its long-term debt. For companies with publicly traded debt, calculate yield to maturity directly from the bond’s price
and promised cash flows. For companies with illiquid debt, use the company’s debt rating to estimate the yield to maturity. Since free cash flow is
measured without interest tax shields, measure the cost of debt on an aftertax basis.
Finally, the after-tax cost of debt and cost of equity should be weighted
using target levels of debt to value and equity to value. For mature companies, the target capital structure is often approximated by the company’s
current debt-to-value ratio, using market values of debt and equity. As will
be explained later, you should not use book values.
In Exhibit 10.1, we present the WACC calculation for Home Depot. The
company’s cost of equity was determined using the CAPM, which led to
a required equity return of 9.9 percent. To apply the CAPM, we used the
December 2003 10-year U.S. government bond rate of 4.3 percent, a market
risk premium of 4.5 percent, and a relevered industry beta of 1.23. As a
1
Depending on the context, we use the terms expected return, required return, and opportunity cost
interchangeably. Expected return refers to an investor’s expected return on a security, given its
level of risk. Financial managers refer to a “required return” because the return on an internal
project must exceed the expected return on comparable invest ments. Otherwise, the investor
would generate better returns outside the company. This is why the term opportunity cost also is
quite common.

300

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

proxy for Home Depot’s pretax cost of debt, we used the yield to maturity
on AA-rated debt (4.7 percent). In Chapter 7, we estimated Home Depot’s
marginal tax rate at 38.2 percent, so its after-tax cost of debt equals 2.9 percent. Finally, we assume Home Depot will maintain a current debt-to-value
ratio of 8.3 percent going forward.2 Adding the weighted contributions from
debt and equity, we arrive at a WACC equal to 9.3 percent.
We discuss each component of the weighted average cost of capital next.

ESTIMATING THE COST OF EQUITY
To estimate the cost of equity, we must determine the expected rate of
return of the company’s stock. Since expected rates of return are unobservable, we rely on asset-pricing models that translate risk into expected return.
The most common asset-pricing model is the capital asset pricing model
(CAPM). Other models include the Fama-French three-factor model and the
arbitrage pricing theory (APT). The three models differ primarily in how
they define risk. The CAPM defines a stock’s risk as its sensitivity to the
stock market,3 whereas the Fama-French three-factor model defines risk as
a stock’s sensitivity to three portfolios: the stock market, a portfolio based
on firm size, and a portfolio based on book-to-market ratios. The CAPM is
the most common method for estimating expected returns, so we begin our
analysis with that model.

Capital Asset Pricing Model
Because the CAPM is discussed at length in modern finance textbooks,4 we
will not delve into the theory here. Instead, we focus on best practices for
implementation.
The CAPM postulates that the expected rate of return on any security
equals the risk-free rate plus the security’s beta times the market risk
premium:
E(Ri) = rf + βi [E(Rm) − rf]

2
Net debt equals reported debt plus the present value of operating leases, less excess cash. Although net debt to value at 8.3 percent is probably overly conservative, there is no evidence that
Home Depot plans to increase its debt-to-value ratio.
3
In theory, the market portfolio represents the value-weighted portfolio of all assets, both
traded (such as stocks) and untraded (such as a person’s skill set). Throughout this chapter, we
use a well-diversified stock portfolio, such as the S&P 500 or the Morgan Stanley Capital International World Index, as a proxy for the market portfolio.
4
For example, Richard Brealey and Stewart Myers, Principles of Corporate Finance (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2002); and Thomas Copeland, Fred Weston, and Kuldeep Shastri, Financial Theory
and Corporate Policy (Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2005).

ESTIMATING THE COST OF EQUITY

301

where E(Ri) = Security i’s expected return
rf = Risk-free rate
βi = Stock’s sensitivity to the market
E(Rm) = Expected return of the market
In the CAPM, the risk-free rate and market risk premium (defined as the
difference between E(Rm) and rf) are common to all companies; only beta
varies across companies. Beta represents a stock’s incremental risk to a diversified investor, where risk is defined by how much the stock covaries
with the aggregate stock market. Consider General Mills, a cereal manufacturer, and Cisco, a maker of network routers. Consumer cereal purchases are
relatively independent of the stock market’s value, so the beta for General
Mills is low; we estimated it at 0.4. Based on a risk-free rate of 4.3 percent and
a market risk premium of 5 percent, the cost of equity for General Mills is estimated at 6.3 percent (see Exhibit 10.2). In contrast, technology companies
tend to have high betas. When the economy struggles, the stock market
drops, and companies stop purchasing new technology. Thus, Cisco’s value
is highly correlated with the market’s value, and its beta is high. Based on a
beta of 1.4, Cisco’s expected rate of return is 11.3 percent. Since General Mills
offers greater protection against market downturns than Cisco, investors are
willing to pay a premium for the stock, driving down expected returns. Conversely, since Cisco offers little diversification to the market portfolio, the
company must earn higher returns to entice investors.
Although the CAPM is based on solid theory (the 1990 Nobel Prize in
Economics was awarded to the model’s primary author, William Sharpe),

Exhibit 10.2 The Capital Assets Pricing Model (CAPM)

Expected return (percent)

14
12
10
Market Portfolio
8
Cisco

6
General
Mills

4
2
0
0

0.5

1
Beta (systematic risk)

1.5

2

302

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

the model provides little guidance for implementation. For instance, when
valuing a company, which risk-free rate should you use? How do you estimate the market risk premium and beta? In the following section, we address these issues. Our general conclusions are as follows:
• To estimate the risk-free rate in developed economies, use highly liquid, long-term government securities, such as the 10-year zerocoupon strip.
• Based on historical averages and forward-looking estimates, the appropriate market risk premium is currently between 4.5 and 5.5 percent.
• To estimate a company’s beta, use an industry-derived unlevered
beta levered to the company’s target capital structure.

Estimating the risk-free rate To estimate the risk-free rate, we look to government default-free bonds.5 Government bonds come in many maturities.
For instance, the U.S. Treasury issues bonds with maturities ranging from
one month to 20 years. Since different maturities can generate different
yields to maturity, which maturity should you use?
Ideally, each cash flow should be discounted using a government bond
with a similar maturity. For instance, a cash flow generated 10 years from
today should be discounted by a cost of capital derived from a 10-year zerocoupon government bond. We prefer zero-coupon government strips because long-term government bonds make interim interest payments,6
causing their effective maturity to be shorter than their stated maturity.
In practice, few people discount each cash flow using a matched maturity. For simplicity, most choose a single yield to maturity from one government bond that best matches the entire cash flow stream being valued. For
U.S.-based corporate valuation, the most common proxy is the 10-year government bond (longer-dated bonds such as the 30-year Treasury might
match the cash flow stream better, but their illiquidity can cause stale
prices and yield premiums). When valuing European companies, we prefer
the 10-year German Eurobond. German bonds have higher liquidity and
lower credit risk than bonds of other European countries. (In most cases,
the differences across European bonds are insignificant.) Note that we use
local government bond yields to estimate the risk-free rate. To handle issues
5
In its most general form, the risk-free rate is defined as the return on a portfolio (or security)
that has no covariance with the market (represented by a CAPM beta of 0). Hypothetically, one
could construct a zero-beta portfolio, but given the cost and complexity of designing such a
portfolio, we recommend focusing on long-term government default-free bonds. Although not
necessarily risk free, long-term government bonds in the United States and Western Europe have
extremely low betas.
6
Introduced in 1985, Treasury STRIPS stands for “Separate Trading of Registered Interest and
Principal of Securities.” The STRIPS program enables investors to hold and trade the individual
components of Treasury notes and bonds as separate securities.

ESTIMATING THE COST OF EQUITY

303

Exhibit 10.3 Government Strip Yields, December 2003
percent
6
U.S. Treasury Strips
5
German
Eurobond
Strips

4
3
2
1
0
0

5

10
Years to maturity

15

20

Source: Bloomberg.

like inflation consistently, we must ensure that cash flows and the cost of
capital are denominated in the same currency.
In Exhibit 10.3, we plot the yield to maturity for various U.S. and German zero-coupon strips versus their years to maturity (a relation commonly
known as the yield curve or term structure of interest rates). As of December 2003, the 10-year U.S. and German treasury strips were both trading at
4.3 percent.
If you are valuing a company or long-term project, do not use a shortterm Treasury bill to determine the risk-free rate. When finance textbooks
calculate the CAPM, they typically use a short-term Treasury rate because
they are estimating expected returns for the next month. As can be seen in
Exhibit 10.3, short-term Treasury bills (near the y-axis) traded well below
10-year bonds (0.9 percent versus 4.3 percent) in December 2003. Investors
typically demand higher interest rates from long-term bonds when they believe short-term interest rates will rise over time. Using the yield from a
short-term bond as the risk-free rate in a valuation fails to recognize that a
bondholder must reinvest at higher rates when the short-term bond matures. Thus, the short-term bond rate misestimates the opportunity cost of
investment for longer-term projects.

Estimating the market risk premium Sizing the market risk premium—
the difference between the market’s expected return and the risk-free
rate—is arguably the most debated issue in finance. The ability of stocks to
outperform bonds over the long run has implications for corporate valuation, portfolio composition, and retirement savings. But similar to a stock’s
expected return, the expected return on the market is unobservable. And

304

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

since no single model for estimating the market risk premium has gained
universal acceptance, we present the results of various models.
Methods to estimate the market risk premium fall in three general
categories:

1. Estimating the future risk premium by measuring and extrapolating
historical excess returns.
2. Using regression analysis to link current market variables, such as the
aggregate dividend-to-price ratio, to project the expected market risk
premium.
3. Using DCF valuation, along with estimates of return on investment
and growth, to reverse engineer the market’s cost of capital.
None of today’s models precisely estimate the market risk premium.
Still, based on evidence from each of these models, we believe the market
risk premium as of year-end 2003 was just under 5 percent.

Historical market risk premium Investors, being risk-averse, demand a
premium for holding stocks rather than bonds. If the level of risk aversion
hasn’t changed over the last 75 years, then historical excess returns are a
reasonable proxy for future premiums (assuming measurement issues, such
as survivorship bias, aren’t overly problematic). To best measure the risk
premium using historical data, follow these guidelines:
• Calculate the premium relative to long-term government bonds.
• Use the longest period possible.
• Use an arithmetic average of longer-dated intervals (such as five years).
• Adjust the result for econometric issues, such as survivorship bias.
Use long-term government bonds When calculating the market risk premium, compare historical market returns with the return on 10-year government bonds. As discussed in the previous section, long-term government
bonds better match the duration of a company’s cash flows than do shortterm bonds.

When using historical observations to predict future results, the issue is what length of history to examine. If the
market risk premium is stable, a longer history will reduce estimation error.
Alternatively, if the premium changes and estimation error is small, a
shorter period is better. To determine the appropriate historical period, we
consider any trends in the market risk premium compared with the noise
associated with short-term estimates.
Use the longest period possible

ESTIMATING THE COST OF EQUITY

305

To test for the presence of a long-term trend, we regress the U.S. market
risk premium versus time. Over the last 100 years, no statistically significant
trend is observable.7 Based on regression results, the average excess return
has fallen by 3.3 basis points a year, but this result is well below its standard
error (leading to a low t-statistic). In addition, premiums calculated over subperiods, even as long as 10 years, are extremely noisy. For instance, U.S.
stocks outperformed bonds by 18 percent in the 1950s but offered no premium in the 1970s. Given the lack of any discernible trend and the significant
volatility of shorter periods, you should use the longest time series possible.
When reporting market risk
premiums, most data providers report an annual number, such as 6.2 percent per year. But how do they convert a century of data into an annual
number? And is an annualized number even important?
Annual returns can be calculated using either an arithmetic average or
a geometric average. An arithmetic (simple) average sums each year’s observed premium and divides by the number of observations:
Use arithmetic average of longer-dated intervals

Arithmetic Average =

1 T 1 + Rm (t)
−1
∑
T t=1 1 + rf (t)

A geometric average compounds each year’s excess return and takes the
root of the resulting product:
 T 1 + Rm (t) 
Geometric Average =  ∏

 t=1 1 + rf (t) 

1/T

−1

The choice of averaging methodology will affect the results. For instance, between 1903 and 2002, U.S. stocks outperformed long-term government bonds by 6.2 percent per year when averaged arithmetically. Using a
geometric average, the number drops to 4.4 percent. This difference is not
random; arithmetic averages always exceed geometric averages when returns are volatile.
So which averaging method on historical data best estimates the expected future rate of return? To estimate the mean (expectation) for any random variable, well-accepted statistical principles dictate that the arithmetic
average is the best unbiased estimator. Therefore, to determine a security’s
7

Some authors, such as Lewellen, argue that the market risk premium does change over time—
and can be measured using financial ratios, such as the dividend yield. We address these models separately. J. Lewellen, “Predicting Returns with Financial Ratios,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 74(2) (2004): 209–235.

306

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

expected return for one period, the best unbiased predictor is the arithmetic
average of many one-period returns. A one-period risk premium, however,
can’t value a company with many years of cash flow. Instead, long-dated
cash flows must be discounted using a compounded rate of return. But when
compounded, the arithmetic average will be biased upward (too high).
This bias is caused by estimation error and autocorrelation in returns.
Let’s examine the effect of estimation error first. To estimate the mean of a
distribution, statistical theory instructs you to average the observations. In
a finite sample, the sample average (RA) will equal the true mean (µ) plus an
error term (ε):
RA = µ + ε

Sometimes the error term is positive, so the sample average overestimates the true mean, and at other times, the error term is negative. But the
average error term equals 0, so the sample average is an unbiased estimator
of the true mean.
To value a cash flow beyond one period, we must determine the discount factor by raising RA to a given power. For instance, to estimate a twoperiod discount rate, we calculate RA squared. Squaring RA leads to the
following equation:
RA = ( µ + ε ) = µ 2 + ε 2 + 2µε
2

Since the true mean, µ, is a constant and the expectation of ε is 0, the expectation of 2µε equals 0. The expectation of ε2, however, is not 0, but a positive
number (the square of any nonzero number is greater than zero). Therefore,
RA2 will be greater than µ2 (the true mean squared), and a compounded
sample average will be too high.
The compounded arithmetic average will also be biased upward when
returns are negatively autocorrelated (meaning low returns follow high returns and high returns follow low returns). Although there is disagreement in the academic community, the general consensus is that the
aggregate stock market exhibits negative autocorrelation.8 In this case, the
arithmetic mean is biased upward.
8

Empirical evidence presented by James Poterba, Lawrence Summers, and others indicates that
a significant long-term negative autocorrelation exists in stock returns. See J. Poterba and L.
Summers, “Mean Reversion in Stock Prices,” Journal of Financial Economics (October 1988):
27–60. However, subsequent studies by Matthew Richardson and others challenge the statistical significance of earlier studies. See M. Richardson, “Temporary Components of Stock Prices:
A Skeptic’s View,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 11 (1993): 199–207.

ESTIMATING THE COST OF EQUITY

307

Exhibit 10.4 Expected Value When Returns Exhibit Negative
Autocorrelation
Potential
return
20%
(10%)

Scenario
1
2
3
4

Current
value
100
100
100
100

Unconditional
probability
50%
50%

Return in
period
one
1.2
1.2
0.9
0.9

Return in
period
two
1.2
0.9
1.2
0.9

Future
value
144
108
108
81

Expected value
when returns are
independent
25%
36.0
25%
27.0
25%
27.0
25%
20.3
100% 110.3

Expected value
when returns are
negatively
autocorrelated
15%
21.6
35%
37.8
35%
37.8
15%
12.2
100% 109.4

To better understand the effect of negative autocorrelation, consider a
portfolio that can either grow by 20 percent or fall by 10 percent in a given
period (see Exhibit 10.4). Since both returns are equally likely, the one period average return equals 5 percent. In addition, if returns are independently and identically distributed, after two periods there is:

1. A 25 percent probability that an initial investment of $100 will
grow to $144
2. A 50 percent probability (two equally probable scenarios) that $100
will grow to $108
3. A 25 percent probability that $100 will shrink to $81
The expected value in two periods equals $110.3, the same as if $100 had
grown consistently at the arithmetic average of 5 percent for two periods.
But if the four scenarios are not equally likely, the expected value in two
periods will not equal $110.3. For instance, if there is a 70 percent probability that low returns will be followed by high returns (or vice versa), the
expected value in two periods is only $109.4. In this case, compounding
the arithmetic mean will lead to an upward bias in expected return.
To correct for the bias caused by estimation error and negative autocorrelation in returns, we have two choices. First, we can calculate multiperiod
holding returns directly from the data, rather than compound single-period
averages. Using this method, a cash flow received in five years will be discounted by the average five-year market risk premium, not by the annual

308

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

Exhibit 10.5 Cumulative Returns for Various Intervals, 1903–2002
percent

Arithmetic mean of
1-year holding periods
2-year holding periods
4-year holding periods
5-year holding periods
10-year holding periods

Number of
observations
100
50
25
20
10

U.S.
stocks
11.3
24.1
49.9
68.2
165.6

Cumulative returns
U.S.
U.S.
government
excess
bonds
return
5.3
6.2
10.9
12.6
23.1
23.0
29.5
32.3
72.1
70.1

Annualized returns
U.S.
excess
Blume
returns
estimator
6.2
6.2
6.1
6.1
5.3
6.0
5.8
5.9
5.5
5.6

Source: Ibbotson Associates, McKinsey analysis.

market risk premium compounded five times.9 In Exhibit 10.5, we present
arithmetic averages for holding periods of 1, 2, 4, 5, and 10 years. To avoid
placing too little weight on either early or recent observations, we use
nonoverlapping returns. The downside of this method is that 5- and 10-year
holding periods have very few observations. As shown in the exhibit, the
annualized excess return trends downward from 6.2 percent to 5.5 percent
as the length of the holding period increases.
Alternatively, researchers have used simulation to show that an estimator proposed by Marshall Blume best adjusts for problems caused by estimation error and autocorrelation of returns:10
R=

where

T−N
N −1
RA +
RG
T −1
T −1

T = Number of historical observations
N = Forecast period
RA = Arithmetic average
RG = Geometric average

In the last column of Exhibit 10.5, we report Blume’s estimate for the market
risk premium. Blume’s method generates the same downward-trending estimate of the market risk premium (albeit more smoothly than the raw
holding period averages). Based on both estimation techniques, it appears
5.5 percent is a reasonable approximation for historical excess returns.
9

Jay Ritter writes, “There is no theoretical reason why one year is the appropriate holding period. People are used to thinking of interest rates as a rate per year, so reporting annualized
numbers makes it easy for people to focus on the numbers. But I can think of no reason other
than convenience for the use of annual returns.” J. Ritter, “The Biggest Mistakes We Teach,”
Journal of Financial Research, 25 (2002): 159–168.
10
D. C. Indro and W. Y. Lee, “Biases in Arithmetic and Geometric Averages Premia,” Financial
Management, 26(4) (Winter 1997); M. E. Blume, “Unbiased Estimators of Long Run Expected
Rates of Return,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 69(347) (September 1974).

ESTIMATING THE COST OF EQUITY

309

Survivorship bias Other statistical difficulties exist with historical risk
premiums. According to one argument,11 even properly measured historical
premiums can’t predict future returns, because the observable sample will
include only countries with strong historical returns. Statisticians refer to
this phenomenon as survivorship bias. The U.S. market outperformed all
others during the twentieth century, averaging 4.3 percent in real terms (deflating by the wholesale price index) versus a median of 0.8 percent for other
countries.12 A concurring study13 notes that the −100 percent returns from
China, Russia, and Poland are too often ignored in discussions of stock market performance.
Since it is unlikely that the U.S. stock market will replicate its performance over the next century, we adjust downward the historical arithmetic
average market risk premium. Using data from Philippe Jorion and William
Goetzmann, we find that between 1926 and 1996, the U.S. arithmetic annual
return exceeded the median return on a set of 11 countries with continuous
histories dating to the 1920s by 1.9 percent in real terms, or 1.4 percent in
nominal terms. If we subtract a 1 percent to 2 percent survivorship bias from
the long-term arithmetic average of 5.5 percent, the difference implies the
future range of the U.S. market risk premium should be 3.5 to 4.5 percent.
Market risk premium regressions Although we find no long-term trend in
the historical risk premium, many argue that the market risk premium is
predictable using observable variables, such as the aggregate dividend-toprice ratio, the aggregate book-to-market ratio, or the aggregate ratio of
earnings to price.
The use of current financial ratios to estimate the expected return on
stocks is well documented and dates back to Charles Dow in the 1920s. The
concept has been tested by many authors.14 To predict the market risk premium using financial ratios, excess market returns are regressed against a
financial ratio, such as the market’s aggregate dividend-to-price ratio:
 Dividend 
+ε
Rm − rf = α + β ln 
 Price 

11
S. Brown, W. Goetzmann, and S. Ross, “Survivorship Bias,” Journal of Finance ( July 1995):
853 –873.
12
P. Jorion and W. Goetzmann, “Global Stock Markets in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Finance, 54(3) ( June 1999): 953 –974.
13
Elroy Dimson, Paul Marsh, and Michael Staunton, Triumph of the Optimists (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2002).
14
E. Fama and K. French, “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 22(1) (1988): 3 –25; R. F. Stambaugh, “Predictive Regressions,” Journal of Financial Economics, 54(3) (1999): 375 – 421; and J. Lewellen, “Predicting Returns with Financial Ratios,” Journal of Financial Economics, 74(2) (2004): 209–235.

310

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

Exhibit 10.6 Expected Market Risk Premium Based on Dividend Yield
percent
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
1955

1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Source: Lewellen (2004), Goyal and Welch (2003), McKinsey analysis.

Using advanced regression techniques unavailable to earlier authors,
Jonathan Lewellen found that dividend yields do predict future market returns. But as shown in Exhibit 10.6, the model has a major drawback: the
risk premium prediction can be negative (as it was in the late 1990s). Other
authors question the explanatory power of financial ratios, arguing that a
financial analyst relying solely on data available at the time would have
done better using unconditional historical averages (as we did in the last
section) in place of more sophisticated regression techniques.15

Forward-looking models A stock’s price equals the present value of its dividends. Assuming dividends are expected to grow at a constant rate, we can
rearrange the growing perpetuity to solve for the market’s expected return:
P=

DIV
ke − g

converts to ke =

DIV
+g
P

In the previous section, we reviewed regression models that compare
market returns (ke) to the dividend-price ratio (DIV/P). Using a simple re15
A. Goyal and I. Welch, “Predicting the Equity Premium with Dividend Ratios,” Management
Science, 4, 9(5) (2003): 639–654.

ESTIMATING THE COST OF EQUITY

311

gression, however, ignores valuable information and oversimplifies a few
market realities. First, the dividend-price yield itself depends on the expected growth in dividends ( g), which simple regressions ignore (the regression’s intercept is determined by the data). Second, dividends are only
one form of corporate payout. Companies can use free cash flow to repurchase shares or hold excess cash for significant periods of time; consider Microsoft, which accumulated more than $50 billion in liquid securities before
paying its first dividend.
Using the principles of discounted cash flow, along with estimates of
growth, various authors have attempted to reverse engineer the market risk
premium. Two studies used analyst forecasts to estimate growth,16 but
many argue that analyst forecasts focus on the short term and are severely
upward biased. Fama and French use long-term dividend growth rates as a
proxy for future growth, but they focus on dividend yields, not on available
cash flow.17 Alternatively, our own research has focused on all cash flow
available to equity holders, as measured by a modified version of the key
value driver formula (detailed in Chapter 3):18

ke =

g 

Earnings  1 −


ROE 
P

g 

+ g such that CFe = Earnings  1 −


ROE 

Based on this formula, we used the long-run return on equity (13 percent)
and the long-run growth in real GDP (3.5 percent) to convert a given year’s
S&P 500 median earnings-to-price ratio into the cost of equity.19
Exhibit 10.7 on page 312 plots the nominal and real expected market
returns between 1962 and 2002. The results are striking. After stripping
out inflation, the expected market return (not excess return) is remarkably
constant, averaging 7.0 percent. For the United Kingdom, the real market
return is slightly more volatile, averaging 6.0 percent. Based on these results, we estimate the current market risk premium by subtracting the
current real long-term risk-free rate from the real equity return of 7.0
percent (for U.S. markets). At year-end 2003, the yield on a U.S. Treasury
inflation-protected security (TIPS) equaled 2.1 percent. Subtracting 2.1
16
J. Claus and J. Thomas, “Equity Premia as Low as Three Percent? Evidence from Analysts’
Earnings Forecasts for Domestic and International Stocks,” Journal of Finance, 56(5) (October
2001): 1629–1666; and W. R. Gebhardt, C. M. C. Lee, and B. Swaminathan, “Toward an Implied
Cost of Capital,” Journal of Accounting Research, 39(1) (2001): 135 –176.
17
Eugene F. Fama and Kenneth R. French, “The Equity Premium,” Center for Research in Security Prices Working Paper No. 522 (April 2001).
18
Marc H. Goedhart, Timothy M. Koller, and Zane D. Williams, “The Real Cost of Equity,”
McKinsey on Finance (Autumn 2002): 11–15.
19
Using a two-stage model (i.e., short-term ROE and growth rate projections, followed by longterm estimates) did not change the results in a meaningful way.

312

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

Exhibit 10.7 Real and Nominal Expected Market Returns
percent
20
Nominal
expected
return

15

10

5

Real
expected
return

0
1962

1972

1982

1992

2002

percent from 7.0 percent gives an estimate of the risk premium at just
under 5 percent.
Although many in the finance profession disagree about how to measure the market risk premium, we believe 4.5 to 5.5 percent is an appropriate range. Historical estimates found in most textbooks (and locked in the
mind of many), which often report numbers near 8 percent, are too high for
valuation purposes because they compare the market risk premium versus
short-term bonds, use only 75 years of data, and are biased by the historical
strength of the U.S. market.

Estimating beta According to the CAPM, a stock’s expected return is driven by beta, which measures how much the stock and market move together. Since beta cannot be observed directly, we must estimate its value. To
do this, we first measure a raw beta using regression and then improve the
estimate by using industry comparables and smoothing techniques. The
most common regression used to estimate a company’s raw beta is the market model:
Ri = α + βRm + ε

In the market model, the stock’s return (not price) is regressed against the
market’s return.
In Exhibit 10.8, we plot 60 months of Home Depot stock returns versus
S&P 500 returns between 1999 and 2003. The solid line represents the “best

ESTIMATING THE COST OF EQUITY

313

Exhibit 10.8 Home Depot: Stock Returns versus S&P 500
Returns, 1999–2003
percent
Beta = 1.37
R² = 0.43

25

Home Depot monthly stock returns

15

5

–25

–15

–5

0

5

15

25

–5

–15

–25
S&P 500 monthly returns

fit” relation between Home Depot’s stock returns and the stock market.
The slope of this line is commonly denoted as beta. For Home Depot, the
company’s raw beta (slope) is 1.37. Since typical betas range between 0 and
2, with the value-weighted average beta equaling 1, this raw result implies
Home Depot is riskier than the typical stock.
But why did we choose to measure Home Depot’s returns in months?
Why did we use five years of data? And how precise is this measurement?
The CAPM is a one-period model and provides little guidance on implementation. Yet, based on certain market characteristics and a variety of empirical tests, we reach several conclusions:
• Raw regressions should use at least 60 data points (e.g., five years of
monthly returns). Rolling betas should be graphed to examine any
systematic changes in a stock’s risk.

314

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

• Raw regressions should be based on monthly returns. Using shorter
return periods, such as daily and weekly returns, leads to systematic biases.
• Company stock returns should be regressed against a valueweighted, well-diversified portfolio, such as the S&P 500 or MSCI
World Index.
Next, recalling that raw regressions provide only estimates of a company’s true beta, we improve estimates of a company’s beta by deriving an
unlevered industry beta and then relevering the industry beta to the company’s target capital structure. If no direct competitors exist, you should
adjust raw company betas by using a smoothing technique. We describe the
basis for our conclusions next.

Measurement period Although there is no common standard for the appropriate measurement period, we follow the practice of data providers
such as Standard & Poor’s and Value Line, which use five years of monthly
data to determine beta. Using five years of monthly data originated as a
rule of thumb during early tests of the CAPM.20 In subsequent tests of optimal measurement periods, researchers confirmed five years as appropriate.21 Not every data provider uses five years. The data service Bloomberg,
for instance, creates raw betas using two years of weekly data.
Because estimates of beta are imprecise, however, plot the company’s
rolling 60-month beta to visually inspect for structural changes or shortterm deviations. For instance, changes in corporate strategy or capital structure often lead to changes in risk for stockholders. In this case, a long
estimation period would place too much weight on stale data.
In Exhibit 10.9, we graph IBM’s raw beta between 1985 and 2004.
As the exhibit shows, IBM’s beta hovered near 0.7 in the 1980s but rose dramatically in the mid-1990s and now measures near 1.3. This rise in beta occurred during a period of great change for IBM, as the company moved
from hardware (such as mainframes) to services (such as consulting). Subsequently, using a long estimation period (for instance, 10 years) would underestimate the risk of the company’s new business model.
Frequency of measurement In 1980, Nobel laureate Robert Merton argued
that estimates of covariance, and subsequently beta, improve as returns are

20
F. Black, M. Jensen, and M. Scholes, “The Capital Asset Pricing Model: Some Empirical Tests,”
in Studies in Theory of Capital Markets, ed. M. Jensen (New York: Praeger, 1972).
21
Alexander and Chervany tested the accuracy of estimation periods from one to nine years.
They found four-year and six-year estimation periods performed best but were statistically indistinguishable. G. Alexander and N. Chervany, “On the Estimation and Stability of Beta,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 15 (1980): 123 –137.

ESTIMATING THE COST OF EQUITY

315

Exhibit 10.9 IBM: Market Beta, 1985–2004
1.6

Beta

1.2

0.8

0.4

0.0
1985

1988

1991

1994

1997

2000

2003

measured more frequently.22 Implementing Merton’s theory, however, has
proven elusive. Empirical problems make high-frequency beta estimation
unreliable. Therefore, we recommend using monthly data.
Using daily or even weekly returns is especially problematic when the
stock is rarely traded. An illiquid stock will have many reported returns
equal to zero, not because the stock’s value is constant but because it
hasn’t traded (only the last trade is recorded). Consequently, estimates of
beta on illiquid stocks are biased downward. Using longer-dated returns,
such as monthly returns, lessens this effect. One proposal for stocks that
trade infrequently even on a monthly basis is to sum lagged betas.23 In
lagged-beta models, a stock’s return is simultaneously regressed on concurrent market returns and market returns from the prior period. The
two betas from the regression are then summed.
A second problem with using high-frequency data is the bid/ask
bounce. Periodic stock prices are recorded at the last trade, and the recorded
price depends on whether the last trade was a purchase (using the ask price)
or a sale (using the bid price). A stock whose intrinsic value remains unchanged will therefore “bounce” between the bid and ask price, causing
distortions in beta estimation. Using longer-period returns dampens this
distortion.
22
R. Merton, “On Estimating the Expected Return on the Market,” Journal of Financial Economics,
8 (1980): 323 –361.
23
M. Scholes and J. T. Williams, “Estimating Betas from Nonsynchronous Data,” Journal of Financial Economics, 5 (1977): 309–327. See also E. Dimson, “Risk Measurement When Shares Are
Subject to Infrequent Trading,” Journal of Financial Economics, 7 (1979): 197–226.

316

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

Over the past few years, promising research on high-frequency beta estimation has emerged, spawned by improvements in computing power and
data collection. One study used five-minute returns to measure beta, and
the estimation method produced more accurate measurements than the
standard 60-month rolling window.24 Since that research was limited to
highly liquid stocks, however, we continue to focus on longer-dated intervals in practice.

The market portfolio In the CAPM, the market portfolio equals the
value-weighted portfolio of all assets, both traded (such as stocks and
bonds) and untraded (such as private companies and human capital). Since
the true market portfolio is unobservable, a proxy is necessary. For U.S.
stocks, the most common proxy is the S&P 500, a value-weighted index of
large U.S. companies. Outside the United States, financial analysts rely on
either a regional index like the MSCI Europe Index or the MSCI World
Index, a value-weighted index comprising large stocks from 23 developed
countries (including the United States).
Most well-diversified indexes, such as the S&P 500 and MSCI World
Index, are highly correlated (the two indexes had an 85.4 percent correlation
between 1999 and 2003). Thus, the choice of index will have little effect on
beta. For instance, Home Depot’s beta with respect to the S&P 500 is 1.37,
whereas the company’s beta with respect to the MSCI World Index is nearly
identical at 1.35. Do not, however, use a local market index. Most countries
are heavily weighted in only a few industries and, in some cases, a few companies. Consequently, when measuring beta versus a local index, you are
not measuring market-wide systematic risk, but rather a company’s sensitivity to a particular industry.
In the late 1990s, equity
markets rose dramatically, but this increase was confined primarily to extremely large capitalization stocks and stocks in the telecommunications,
media, and technology sectors (commonly known as TMT). Historically,
TMT stocks contribute approximately 20 percent of the market value of the
S&P 500. Between 1999 and 2001, this percentage rose to nearly 50 percent.
And as the market portfolio changed, so too did industry betas. As shown
by the historical betas for 10 industries in Exhibit 10.10, betas related to
TMT rose dramatically during the tech boom, while betas outside the TMT
sector fell. For instance, between 1990 and 1997, the food industry had an
average beta of 0.85. Immediately following the tech boom, the food industry’s beta dropped to zero.
The internet bubble distorted the market portfolio

24
T. Bollerslev and B. Y. B. Zhang, “Measuring and Modeling Systematic Risk in Factor Pricing
Models Using High-Frequency Data,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 10 (2003): 533 –558.

ESTIMATING THE COST OF EQUITY

317

Exhibit 10.10 Measuring Beta with and without TMT Bubble Years¹
Average beta
1990–1997

2003 beta, including
TMT bubble2

Adjusted 2003 beta,
excluding TMT bubble2

TMT sectors
2.15

1.78

Telecom equipment

1.33

2.10

1.72

Software

1.32

2.04

1.54

Semiconductors

Electronic equipment

1.07

Wireless telecom

0.93

1.18
2.60

1.47

1.88

1.44

Non-TMT sectors
1.07

Pharmaceuticals
Chemicals

1.01

Food

0.85

0.33
0.59
0.02

1.08
0.76
0.65

Integrated oil

0.59

0.25

0.53

Electricity

0.54

0.13

0.62

1

TMT stands for telecommunications, media, and technology.
Period from January 1998 to December 2001.
Source: Thomson Financial Datastream, McKinsey analysis.

2

But will these new, widely dispersed, betas continue? Probably not.
Since 2001, the market portfolio has returned to its traditional composition.
Therefore, betas are likely to normalize as well. To this end, we argue that
estimates of future beta should exclude observations from 1998 to 2001.25
Remember, the end goal is not to measure beta historically, but rather to
use the historical estimate as a predictor of future value. In this case, recent
history isn’t very useful and should not be overweighted.

Improving estimates of beta: Industry betas Estimating beta is an imprecise process. Earlier, we used historical regression to estimate Home
Depot’s raw beta at 1.37. But the regression’s R-squared was only 43 percent, and the standard error of the beta estimate was 0.20. Using two standard errors as a guide, we feel confident Home Depot’s true beta lies
between 0.97 and 1.77—hardly a tight range.
To improve the precision of beta estimation, use industry, rather than
company-specific, betas.26 Companies in the same industry face similar
25

André Annema and Marc Goedhart, “Better Betas,” McKinsey on Finance (Winter 2003): 10–13.
If unlevered industry betas are drawn from the same distribution, the standard error of the industry average equals the volatility of the beta distribution divided by the square root of the
number of observations. Thus, the standard error of an industry beta falls as the number of beta
observations rises.
26

318

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

operating risks, so they should have similar operating betas. As long as estimation errors across companies are uncorrelated, overestimates and underestimates of individual betas will tend to cancel, and an industry
median (or average) beta will produce a superior estimate.27
Simply using the median of an industry’s raw betas, however, overlooks
an important factor: leverage. A company’s beta is a function of not only its
operating risk, but also the financial risk it takes. Shareholders of a company with more debt face greater risks, and this increase is reflected in
beta. Therefore, to compare companies with similar operating risks, we
must first strip out the effect of leverage. Only then can we compare beta
across an industry.
To undo the effect of leverage (and its tax shield), we rely on the theories
of Franco Modigliani and Merton Miller (M&M), introduced in Chapter 5.
According to M&M, the weighted average risk of a company’s financial
claims equals the weighted average risk of a company’s economic assets.
Using beta to represent risk, this relation is as follows:
Vu

βu +

Vu + Vtxa
Operating
Assets

Vtxa
Vu + Vtxa
Tax
Asset

βtxa =

D
E
βd +
βe
D+E
D+E
Debt
Equity

where Vu = Value of the company’s operating assets
Vtxa = Value of the company’s interest tax shields
D = Market value of the company’s debt
E = Market value of the company’s equity
In Appendix D, we rearrange the equation to solve for the beta of equity
(βe). This leads to:
βe = βu +

Vtxa
D
βu − βd ) −
(
(βu − βtxa )
E
E

To simplify the formula further, most practitioners impose two additional restrictions.28 First, because debt claims have first priority, the beta of
27

Statistically speaking, the sample average will have the lowest mean squared error. However,
because sample averages are heavily inf luenced by outliers, we recommend examining both the
mean and median beta.
28
In Chapter 5, we detailed alternative restrictions that can be imposed to simplify the general
equation regarding risk. Rather than repeat the analysis, we focus on the least restrictive assumption for mature companies: that debt remains proportional to value. For a full discussion
of which restrictions to impose and how they affect the cost of capital, please see the section on
adjusted present value in Chapter 5.

ESTIMATING THE COST OF EQUITY

319

debt tends to be low. Thus, many assume (for simplicity) the beta of debt is
0. Second, if the company maintains a constant capital structure, the value
of tax shields will fluctuate with the value of operating assets and beta of
the tax shields (βtxa) will equal the beta of the unlevered company (βu). Setting βtxa equal to βu eliminates the final term:
D

βe = βu  1 + 

E

(1)

Thus, a company’s equity beta equals the company’s operating beta (commonly known as the unlevered beta) times a leverage factor. As leverage
rises, so will the company’s equity beta. Using this relation, we can convert
equity betas into unlevered betas. Since unlevered betas focus solely on operating risk, they can be averaged across an industry (assuming industry
competitors have similar operating characteristics).
To estimate an industry-adjusted company beta, use the following fourstep process. First, regress each company’s stock returns against the S&P
500 to determine raw beta. In Exhibit 10.11 on page 320, we report regression betas for Home Depot (1.37) and Lowe’s (1.15). Next, to unlever each
beta, calculate each company’s market-debt-to-equity ratio. To calculate net
debt ($6.310 billion for Home Depot), add the book value of reported debt
($1.365 billion) to the estimated value of operating leases ($6.554 billion)
and then subtract excess cash ($1.609 billion).29 To determine equity value
($80.101 billion), we multiply the company’s stock price ($35.49) by the
number of shares outstanding (2.257 billion). With debt and equity in hand,
compute debt to equity (.079). Applying equation 1 leads to an unlevered
beta of 1.27 for Home Depot and 1.02 for Lowe’s. In step three, determine
the industry unlevered beta by calculating the median (in this case, the median and average betas are the same).30 In the final step, relever the industry
unlevered beta is to each company’s target debt-to-equity ratio (using current market values as proxies).

Unlevered cost of equity As demonstrated, we can unlever an equity beta
in order to improve beta estimation for use in the CAPM and WACC. We also
can use unlevered industry betas to estimate a company’s unlevered cost
of equity. To estimate the unlevered cost of equity for use in an adjusted
present value (APV) valuation, simply apply the CAPM to the industry unlevered beta.
29

The process for valuing operating leases and excess cash is detailed in Chapter 7.
In most valuations, more than two company betas are available. For Home Depot, Lowe’s is the
only publicly traded competitor. As a general rule, use as many direct comparables as possible.

30

320

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

Exhibit 10.11 Determining the Industry Beta
$ million
Capital structure
Debt
Operating leases
Excess cash
Total net debt

Home Depot
1,365
6,554
(1,609)
6,310

Lowe’s
3,755
2,762
(948)
5,569

2,257
35.49
80,101

787
55.39
43,592

0.079

0.128

Home Depot
1.37
1.27

Lowe’s
1.15
1.02

Shares outstanding (millions)
Share price ($)
Market value of equity
Debt/equity
Beta calculations
Raw beta (step 1)
Unlevered beta (step 2)

Industry average unlevered beta (step 3)
Relevered beta (step 4)

1.14
1.23

1.14
1.30

Improving estimates of beta: Smoothing For well-defined industries, an
industry beta will suffice. But if few direct comparables exist, an alternative is beta smoothing. Consider the simple smoothing process used by
Bloomberg:
Adjusted Beta = (.33) + (.67) Raw Beta

Using this formula “smooths” raw estimates toward 1. For instance, a
raw beta of 0.5 leads to an adjusted beta of 0.67, while a raw beta of 1.5 leads
to an adjusted beta of 1.34. Bloomberg’s smoothing mechanism dates back to
Blume’s observation that betas revert to the mean.31 Today, more advanced
smoothing techniques exist.32 Although the proof is beyond the scope of this
book, the following adjustment will reduce beta estimation error:
βadj =

31

σ ε2

σ ε2


(
1
)
+
1
−
β

2
2
2
2  raw

σε + σb
σε + σb 

M. Blume, “Betas and Their Regression Tendencies,” Journal of Finance, 30 (1975): 1–10.
For instance, see P. Jorion, “Bayes-Stein Estimation for Portfolio Analysis,” Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis, 21 (1986): 279–292.
32

ESTIMATING THE COST OF EQUITY

321

where σε = The standard error of the regression beta
σb = The cross-sectional standard deviation of all betas
The raw regression beta receives the most weight when the standard
error of beta from the regression (σε) is smallest. In fact, when beta is measured perfectly (σε = 0), the raw beta receives all the weight. Conversely, if
the regression provides no meaningful results (σε is very large), you should
set beta equal to 1.
For Home Depot, the standard error of the beta estimate equals
0.20, and in 2004 the cross-sectional standard deviation of beta (across all
S&P 500 stocks) equaled 0.590. Therefore, the adjusted beta equals 0.103 +
(1 − 0.103) × 1.37, or 1.33.

Alternatives to the CAPM: Fama-French Three-Factor Model
In 1992, Eugene Fama and Kenneth French published a paper in the Journal
of Finance that received a great deal of attention because they concluded, “In
short, our tests do not support the most basic prediction of the SLB [SharpeLintner-Black] Capital Asset Pricing Model that average stock returns are
positively related to market betas.”33 At the time, theirs was the most recent
in a series of empirical studies that questioned the usefulness of estimated
betas in explaining the risk premium on equities. Among the factors negatively or positively associated with equity returns were the size of the
company, a seasonal ( January) effect, the degree of financial leverage, and
the firm’s book-to-market ratio.34 Based on prior research and their own
comprehensive regressions, Fama and French concluded that equity returns are inversely related to the size of a company (as measured by market
capitalization) and positively related to the ratio of a company’s book value
to its market value of equity.
Given the strength of Fama and French’s empirical results, the academic
community has begun measuring risk with a model commonly known as the
Fama-French three-factor model. With this model, a stock’s excess returns
are regressed on excess market returns (similar to the CAPM), the excess
33
E. Fama and K. French, “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance
( June 1992): 427– 465.
34
R. Blanz, “The Relationship between Return and the Market Value of Common Stocks,” Journal of Financial Economics (March 1981): 3 –18; M. Reinganum, “Misspecification of Capital Asset
Pricing: Empirical Anomalies Based on Earnings Yields and Market Values,” Journal of Financial
Economics (March 1981): 19– 46; S. Basu, “The Relationship between Earnings Yield, Market
Value and Return for NYSE Common Stocks: Further Evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics
( June 1983): 129–156; L. Bhandari, “Debt/Equity Ratio and Expected Common Stock Returns:
Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Finance (April 1988): 507–528; D. Statt man, “Book Values and
Stock Returns,” The Chicago MBA: A Journal of Selected Papers (1980): 25 – 45; and B. Rosenberg, K.
Reid, and R. Lanstein, “Persuasive Evidence of Market Inefficiency,” Journal of Portfolio Management (1985): 9–17.

322

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

Exhibit 10.12 Home Depot’s Fama-French Cost of Equity

Factor
Market risk premium
SMB premium
HML premium
Premium over risk free rate

Average
monthly
premium
(percent)
0.25
0.36

Average
annual
premium
(percent)
4.5
3.0
4.4

Regression
beta
1.35
(0.04)
(0.10)
Risk free rate
Cost of equity

Contribution
to expected
return
(percent)
6.1
(0.1)
(0.5)
5.5
4.3
9.8

returns of small stocks over big stocks (SMB), and the excess returns of
high book-to-market stocks over low book-to-market stocks (HML).35 Because the risk premium is determined by a regression on the SMB and HML
stock portfolios, a company does not receive a premium for being small. Instead, the company receives a risk premium if its stock returns are correlated with those of small stocks or high book-to-market companies. The
SMB and HML portfolios are meant to replicate unobservable risk factors,
factors that caused small companies with high book-to-market values to
outperform their CAPM expected returns.
To run a Fama-French regression, we need monthly returns for three
portfolios: the market portfolio, the SMB portfolio, and the HML portfolio.
Given the model’s popularity, Fama-French portfolio returns are now available from professional data providers.
We use the Fama-French three-factor model to estimate Home Depot’s
cost of equity in Exhibit 10.12. To determine the company’s three betas,
regress Home Depot stock returns against the excess market portfolio,
SMB, and HML. The regression in Exhibit 10.12 used monthly returns and
was specified as follows:
Ri − rf = α + β1 (Rm − rf ) + β 2 ( RS − RB ) + β 3 ( RH − RL ) + ε

As the exhibit indicates, Home Depot’s traditional beta remains unchanged, but its cost of equity is lower in the Fama-French model because
Home Depot is correlated with other large companies (small companies
outperform large companies) and other companies with a low book-tomarket ratio (high book-to-market companies outperform low book-to35
For a complete description of the factor returns, see E. Fama and K. French, “Common Risk
Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics, 33 (1993): 3 –56.

ESTIMATING THE COST OF EQUITY

323

market companies). Based on the historical annualized premiums for SMB
(3.0 percent) and HML (4.4 percent), Home Depot’s cost of capital equals 9.8
percent, versus 10.4 percent according to the standard CAPM. (These values
are not comparable to the cost of equity presented in Exhibit 10.1, which
used industry betas.)
The Fama-French model suffers from the same implementation issues
as the CAPM. For instance, how much data should you use to determine the
each factor’s risk premium? Since 1926, small companies have outperformed large companies, but since 1982, they have not. Should returns be regressed using monthly data? Should regressions use five years of data?
Given the model’s recent development, many of these questions are still
under investigation.

Alternatives to the CAPM: The Arbitrage Pricing Theory
Another alternative to the CAPM, the arbitrage pricing theory (APT), resembles a generalized version of the Fama-French three-factor model. In the APT,
a security’s actual returns are fully specified by k factors and random noise:
R i = α + β1 F1 + β 2 F2 + . . . + β k Fk + ε

By creating well-diversified factor portfolios, it can be shown that a security’s expected return must equal the risk-free rate plus the cumulative sum
of its exposure to each factor times the factor’s risk premium (λ):
E [ R i ] = rf + β1 λ 1 + β 2 λ + . . . + β k λ k

Otherwise, arbitrage is possible (positive return with zero risk).
On paper, the theory is extremely powerful. Any deviations from the
model result in unlimited returns with no risk. In practice, implementation
of the model has been elusive, as there is little agreement about how many
factors there are, what the factors represent, or how to measure the factors.
For this reason, use of the APT resides primarily in the classroom.

In Defense of Beta
Fama and French significantly damaged the credibility of the CAPM and
beta. Today, most academics rely on three-factor models to measure historical risk and return. Even so, the three-factor model has its critics. To start,
the CAPM is based on solid theory about risk and return (albeit with strong
assumptions), whereas the Fama-French model is based purely on empirical
evidence. Although the latter model has been loosely tied to risk factors

324

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

such as illiquidity (size premium) and default risk ( book-to-market premium), no theory has gained universal acceptance.
In addition, S. P. Kothari, Jay Shanken, and Richard Sloan argue that
beta may work better than portrayed in Fama and French. They point out
that Fama and French’s statistical tests were of low enough power that
the tests could not reject a nontrivial ( beta-related) risk premium of 6 percent over the post-1940 period.36 Second, when they used annual returns,
rather than monthly returns, to estimate beta (to avoid seasonality in
returns), they found a significant linear relationship between beta
and returns. Finally, they argue that the economic magnitude of size is
quite small, and book-to-market premiums could be a result of survivorship bias.
Other research argues that the Fama-French three-factor model historically outperforms the CAPM because either beta or the market portfolio
has been improperly measured. In a recent study, a one-factor model based
on time-varying conditional betas eliminated the book-to-market effect.37
Another article argues that regressions based on equity-only portfolios,
such as the S&P 500, leads to the incorrect measurement of beta.38 This mismeasurement is correlated with leverage, which in turn is correlated with
size and book-to-market. When the researchers controlled for leverage, excess returns associated with HMB and SML disappeared.
The bottom line? It takes a better theory to kill an existing theory, and
we have yet to see the better theory. Therefore, we continue to use the
CAPM while keeping a watchful eye on new research in the area.

ESTIMATING THE AFTER-TAX COST OF DEBT
To estimate the cost of debt, use the yield to maturity of the company’s
long-term, option-free bonds. Technically speaking, yield to maturity is
only a proxy for expected return, because the yield is actually a promised
rate of return on a company’s debt (it assumes all coupon payments are
made on time and the debt is paid in full). An enterprise valuation based
indirectly on the yield to maturity is therefore theoretically inconsistent:
expected free cash flows should not be discounted by a promised yield.
For companies with highly rated debt, however, this inconsistency is
36
S. Kothari, J. Shanken, and R. Sloan, “Another Look at the Cross-Section of Expected Returns,” Journal of Finance (December 1995).
37
A. Ang and J. Chen, “CAPM over the Long Run: 1926 –2001,” (working paper, Los Angeles:
University of Southern California, 2004).
38
M. Ferguson and R. Shockley, “Equilibrium ‘Anomalies,’ ” Journal of Finance, 58(6) (2003):
2549–2580.

ESTIMATING THE AFTER-TAX COST OF DEBT

325

immaterial, especially when compared with the estimation error surrounding beta and the market risk premium. Thus, for estimating the cost
of debt for a company with investment-grade debt (debt rated at BBB or
better), yield to maturity is a suitable proxy.
When calculating yield to maturity, use long-term bonds. As discussed
earlier, short-term bonds do not match the duration of the company’s free
cash flow. To solve for yield to maturity (ytm), reverse engineer the discount rate required to set the present value of the bond’s promised cash
flows equal to its price:
Price =

Coupon
(1 + ytm)

+

Coupon
(1 + ytm)

2

+ ... +

Face + Coupon
(1 + ytm)N

Ideally, yield to maturity should be calculated on liquid, option-free,
long-term debt. If the bond is rarely traded, the bond price will be stale.
Using stale prices will lead to an outdated yield to maturity. Yield to maturity will also be distorted when corporate bonds have attached options,
such as callability or convertibility, as their value will affect the bond’s
price but not its promised cash flows.

Bond Ratings and Yield to Maturity
For companies with only short-term bonds or bonds that rarely trade, determine yield to maturity by using an indirect method. First, determine the
company’s credit rating on unsecured long-term debt. Next, examine the
average yield to maturity on a portfolio of long-term bonds with the same
credit rating. Use this yield as a proxy for the company’s implied yield on
long-term debt.
Investing in corporate debt is not risk free. Each year, a number of
companies default on their obligations. In 2002, corporate bond defaults
reached $163.6 billion worldwide. Since the probability of default is critical to bond pricing, professional rating agencies, such as Standard &
Poor’s (S&P) and Moody’s, will rate a company’s debt. To determine a
company’s bond rating, a ratings agency will examine the company’s most
recent financial ratios, analyze the company’s competitive environment,
and interview senior management. Corporate bond ratings are freely
available to the public and can be downloaded from rating agency Web
sites. For example, consider Home Depot. On June 10, 2004, Moody’s reaffirmed its credit rating for Home Depot at Aa3 for its long-term debt. During that same time period, S&P rated Home Depot slightly higher at AA.
In this case, the two agencies’ ratings were different. Split ratings occur,
but relatively infrequently.

326

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

Exhibit 10.13 Yield Spread over U.S. Treasuries by Bond Rating,
December 2003
Basis points
Rating
Aaa/AAA
Aa1/AA+
Aa2/AA
Aa3/AA–
A2/A
Baa2/BBB
Ba2/BB
B2/B

1
34
37
39
40
57
79
228
387

2
28
31
33
34
49
91
245
384

3
35
33
34
36
49
96
260
384

Maturity in Years
5
7
21
22
34
40
35
42
37
43
57
65
108
111
257
250
349
332

10
28
29
34
37
48
102
236
303

30
50
62
64
65
82
134
263
319

Source: Bloomberg.

Once you have a rating, convert the rating into a yield to maturity. Exhibit 10.13 presents U.S. corporate yield spreads over U.S. government
bonds. All quotes are presented in basis points, where 100 basis points
equals 1 percent. Since Home Depot is rated AA by S&P and Aa3 by
Moody’s, we estimate that the 10-year yield to maturity is between 34 and
37 basis points over the 10-year Treasury. Adding 34 basis points to the
risk-free rate of 4.34 percent equals 4.68 percent.
Using the company’s bond ratings to determine the yield to maturity is
a good alternative to calculating the yield to maturity directly. Never, however, approximate the yield to maturity using a bond’s coupon rate. Coupon
rates are set by the company at time of issuance and only approximate the
yield if the bond trades near its par value. When valuing a company, you
must estimate expected returns relative to today’s alternative investments.
Thus, when you measure the cost of debt, estimate what a comparable investment would earn if bought or sold today.

Below-Investment-Grade Debt
In practice, few financial analysts distinguish between expected and
promised returns. But for debt below investment grade, using the yield to
maturity as a proxy for the cost of debt can cause significant error.
To better understand the difference between expected returns and
yield to maturity, consider the following example. You have been asked to
value a one-year zero-coupon bond whose face value is $100. The bond is
risky; there is a 25 percent chance the bond will default and you will recover
only half the final payment. Finally, the cost of debt (not yield to maturity),
estimated using the CAPM, equals 6 percent. Based on this information,

ESTIMATING THE AFTER-TAX COST OF DEBT

327

Exhibit 10.14 Beta by Bond Class, 1990–2000
Asset class
Treasury bonds
Investment-grade corporate debt
High-yield corporate debt

Beta
0.19
0.27
0.37

Source: Lehman Brothers, “Global Family of Indices, Fixed Income Research”; Morgan Stanley Capital International; U.S. Treasury, Paul Sweeting.

you estimate the bond’s price by discounting expected cash flows by the
cost of debt:
Price =

E [ CF ] (.75)($100) + (.25)($50)
=
= $82.55
1 + kd
1.06

Next, to determine the bond’s yield to maturity, place promised cash
flows, rather than expected cash flows, into the numerator. Then solve for
the yield to maturity:
Price =

Promised [ CF ]
1 + ytm

=

$100
= $82.55
1 + ytm

The $82.55 price leads to a 21.1 percent yield to maturity, much higher
than the cost of debt. So what drives the yield to maturity? Three factors:
the cost of debt, the probability of default, and the recovery rate. When the
probability of default is high and the recovery rate is low, the yield to maturity will deviate significantly from the cost of debt. Thus, for companies
with high default risk and low ratings, the yield to maturity is a poor proxy
for the cost of debt.
To estimate the cost of high-yield debt, we rely on the CAPM (a general
pricing model, applicable to any security). Bond indexes are used to generate betas, since individual bonds rarely trade. Exhibit 10.14 presents the
market beta for investment-grade and high-yield bonds. As reported in the
exhibit, high-yield bonds have a beta 0.1 higher than investment-grade
bonds. Assuming a 5 percent market risk premium, this translates to a premium of 0.5 percent over investment-grade bonds. Thus, to calculate the
cost of debt for a company with debt rated BB or below, use the BBB yield to
maturity and add 0.5 percent.

Incorporating the Interest Tax Shield
To calculate free cash flow (using techniques detailed in Chapter 7), we
compute taxes as if the company were entirely financed by equity. By using
all-equity taxes, we can make comparisons across companies and over time,

328

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

without regard to capital structure. Yet, since the tax shield has value, it
must be accounted for. In an enterprise DCF using the WACC, the tax shield
is valued as part of the cost of capital. To value the tax shield, reduce the
cost of debt by the marginal tax rate:
After-Tax Cost of Debt = Cost of Debt × (1 − Tm)

Chapter 7 detailed how to calculate the marginal tax rate for historical
analysis. For use in the cost of capital, you should calculate the marginal tax
rate in a consistent manner, with one potential modification to account for
the timing of future tax payments. According to research by John Graham,
the statutory marginal tax rate overstates the future marginal tax rate because of rules related to tax-loss carryforwards, tax-loss carrybacks, investment tax credits, and alternative minimum taxes.39 For instance, when a
company loses money, it will receive a cash credit only if it has been profitable in the past three years; otherwise, it must carry the loss forward until
it is once again profitable.
Graham uses simulation to estimate the realizable marginal tax rate on
a company-by-company basis. For investment-grade companies, use the
statutory rate. For instance, because Home Depot is highly profitable, Graham’s model estimates the company’s future marginal statutory tax rate at
the full 35 percent. The typical company, however, does not always fully use
its tax shields. Graham estimates the marginal tax rate is on average 5 percentage points below the statutory rate.

USE TARGET WEIGHTS TO DETERMINE COST OF CAPITAL
With our estimates of the cost of equity and cost of debt, we can now blend
the two expected returns into a single number. To do this, we use the target
weights of debt and equity to enterprise value, on a market (not book) basis:
WACC =

E
D
kd (1 − Tm ) + ke
V
V

Using market values to weight expected returns in the cost of capital
follows directly from the formula’s derivation (see Appendix C for a derivation of free cash flow and WACC). But consider a more intuitive explanation: the WACC represents the expected return on an alternative investment
with identical risk. Rather than reinvest in the company, management could
return capital to investors, who could reinvest elsewhere. To return capital
without changing the capital structure, management can repay debt and re39
J. Graham, “Debt and the Marginal Tax Rate,” Journal of Financial Economics, 41 (1996): 41–73;
and J. Graham, “Proxies for the Corporate Marginal Tax Rate,” Journal of Financial Economics, 42
(1996): 187–221.

USE TARGET WEIGHTS TO DETERMINE COST OF CAPITAL

329

purchase shares, but must do so at their market value. Conversely, book
value represents a sunk cost, so it is no longer relevant.
The cost of capital should rely on target weights, rather than current
weights, because at any point, a company’s current capital structure may
not reflect the level expected to prevail over the life of the business. The current capital structure may merely reflect a short-term swing in the company’s stock price, a swing that has yet to be rebalanced by management.
Thus, using today’s capital structure may cause you to overestimate (or underestimate) the value of tax shields for companies whose leverage is expected to drop (or rise).
Many companies are already near their target capital structure. If yours is
not, decide how quickly the company will achieve the target. In the simplest
scenario, the company will rebalance immediately and maintain the new capital structure. In this case, using the target weights and a constant WACC (for
all future years) will lead to a reasonable valuation. If you expect the rebalancing to happen over a significant period of time, then use a different cost of
capital each year, reflecting the capital structure at the time. In practice, this
procedure is complex; you must correctly model not only the weights, but
also the changes in the cost of debt and equity (because of increased default
risk and higher betas). For extreme changes in capital structure, modeling enterprise DCF using a constant WACC can lead to significant error. In this
case, value the company with adjusted present value (APV).
To develop a target capital structure for a company, use a combination of
three approaches:

1. Estimate the company’s current market-value-based capital structure.
2. Review the capital structure of comparable companies.
3. Review management’s implicit or explicit approach to financing the
business and its implications for the target capital structure.
Estimating Current Capital Structure
To determine the company’s current capital structure, measure the market
value of all claims against enterprise value. For most companies, the claims
will consist primarily of debt and equity (we address more complex securities in the last section). If a company’s debt and equity are publicly traded,
simply multiply the quantity of each security by its most recent price. Most
difficulties arise when securities are not traded such that prices can be
readily observed.

Debt If an observable market value is not readily available, you can value
debt securities at book or use discounted cash flow. In most cases, book
value reasonably approximates the current market value. This will not be

330

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

the case, however, if interest rates have changed dramatically since the time
of issuance or the company is in financial distress. In these two situations,
the current price will differ from book value because either expected cash
flows have changed (increased probability of default lowers expected cash
flow) or the discount rate has changed (interest rates drive discount rates)
from their original levels.40
In these situations, value each bond separately by discounting promised
cash flows at the appropriate yield to maturity. Promised cash flows will be
disclosed in the notes of a company’s annual report. Determine the appropriate yield to maturity by examining the yields from comparably rated debt
with similar maturities.

Debt equivalent claims Next, value off-balance-sheet debt, such as operating leases and pension liabilities. As detailed in Chapter 7, operating leases
can be valued using the following formula:
Lease Valuet−1 =

Rental Expenset
1
kd +
Asset Life

Only include operating leases in debt if you plan to adjust free cash
flow for operating leases as well. Consistency between free cash flow and
the cost of capital is paramount. Any pension adjustments made to free
cash flow must be properly represented in the debt portion of the cost of
capital. Specifically, if you add back any tax shields during adjustments to
NOPLAT, you must account for the tax shields in the present value of pension liabilities and the cost of debt.

Equity If common stock is publicly traded, multiply the market price by
the number of shares outstanding. The market value of equity should be
based on shares outstanding in the capital market. Therefore, do not use
shares issued, as they may include shares repurchased by the company.
At this point, you may be wondering why you are valuing the company
if you are going to rely on the market’s value of equity in the cost of capital.
Shouldn’t we be using the estimated equity value? The answer is no. Remember, we are only estimating today’s market value to frame management’s philosophy concerning capital structure. To value the company, use
target weights.
For privately held companies, no market-based values are available. In this
case, you must determine equity value (for the cost of capital) either using a
40
For f loating-rate bonds, changes in Treasury rates won’t affect value, since coupons f loat with
Treasury yields. Changes in market-based default premiums, however, will affect the market
value of f loating-rate bonds, since bonds are priced at a fixed spread above Treasury yields.

USE TARGET WEIGHTS TO DETERMINE COST OF CAPITAL

331

multiples approach or through DCF iteratively. To perform an iterative valuation, assume a reasonable capital structure, and value the enterprise using
DCF. Using the estimate of debt to enterprise value, repeat the valuation. Continue this process until the valuation no longer materially changes.

Minority interest If minority interest—claims by outside shareholders on
a portion of a company’s business (often a subsidiary acquired by the company)—is publicly traded, then you can determine their approximate value
directly from the market price for the shares. When the minority interest is
not publicly traded, you must estimate its current value. To do this, apply a
company-specific or industry price-to-earnings ratio directly to the income
generated for minority interest.
Review Capital Structure of Comparable Companies
To place the company’s current capital structure in the proper context,
compare its capital structure with those of similar companies. Exhibit
10.15 presents the median debt-to-value levels for 11 industries. As the exhibit shows, industries with heavy fixed investment in tangible assets
tend to have higher debt levels. High-growth industries, especially those

Exhibit 10.15 Median Debt-to-Market Value by Industry, 2003
percent
Information technology 0
Healthcare

4

Aerospace and defense

12

Industrial machinery

13

Consumer discretionary

15

Consumer staples

19

Oil and gas

22

Chemicals, paper, metals

26

Telecommunications

30

Airlines

33

Utilities

47

0

10

20

30

40

Note: Market value of debt proxied by book value. Enterprise value proxied by book value of debt plus market value of equity.

50

332

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

with intangible investments, tend to use very little debt. Economy-wide, the
median debt-to-value ratio for the S&P 500 is 13.1 percent, and the median
debt-to-equity ratio is 19.7 percent.
Having a company with a different capital structure is perfectly acceptable, but you should understand why. For instance, is the company by philosophy more aggressive or innovative in the use of debt financing, or is the
capital structure only a temporary deviation from a more conservative target? Often, companies finance acquisitions with debt they plan to quickly
retire or refinance with a stock offering. Alternatively, is there anything
different about the company’s cash flow or asset intensity that can explain
the difference? Always use comparables to help you assess the reasonableness of estimated debt-to-equity levels.

Review Management ’s Philosophy
As a final step, review management’s historical financing philosophy (or
question management outright). Has the current team been actively managing the company’s capital structure? Is the management team aggressive in
its use of debt? Or is it overly conservative? Consider UPS, a company with
a well-known conservative culture. Although cash flow is strong and stable,
the company rarely issues debt. From a financing perspective, it doesn’t
need to issue additional securities; investments can be funded with current
profits. Since the company is primarily employee owned, there is little
threat of outside takeover. Therefore, UPS is unlikely to increase its target
debt-to-value ratio anytime soon.
Over the long run, one would expect most companies to aim toward a
target capital structure that minimizes cost of capital. We will address the
choice of capital structure in Chapter 17.

COMPLEX CAPITAL STRUCTURES
The weighted average cost of capital is determined by weighting each security’s expected return by its proportional contribution to total value. For a
complex security, such as convertible debt, measuring expected return is
challenging. Is a convertible bond like straight debt, enabling us to use the
yield to maturity? Is it equity, enabling us to use the CAPM? In actuality, it
is neither, so we recommend an alternative method.
If the treatment of hybrid securities will make a material difference in
valuation results,41 we recommend using adjusted present value (APV). In
the APV, enterprise value is determined by discounting free cash flow at
41
If the hybrid security is unlikely to be converted, it can be treated as traditional debt. Conversely, if the hybrid security is well “in the money,” it should be treated as traditional equity. In these situations, errors are likely to be small, and a WACC-based valuation remains
appropriate.

HEINEKEN CASE

333

the unlevered cost of equity. The value of incremental cash flows related to
financing, such as interest tax shields, is then computed separately. To determine the company’s unlevered cost of equity, use the unlevered industry
beta. This avoids the need to compute company specific components, such
as the debt-to-equity ratio, a required input in the unlevering equation.
In some situations, you may still desire an accurate representation of
the cost of capital. In these cases, split hybrid securities into their individual components. For instance, you can replicate a convertible bond by combining a traditional bond with a call option on the company’s stock. You can
further disaggregate a call option into a portfolio consisting of a risk-free
bond and the company’s stock. By converting a complex security into a
portfolio of debt and equity, you once again have the components required
for the traditional cost of capital. The process of creating replicating portfolios to value options is discussed in Chapter 20.

HEINEKEN CASE
In the case for this chapter, we explain how we estimated Heineken’s WACC. Our estimate of Heineken’s WACC is 7.5 percent as of the end of February 2004, as shown
in Exhibit 10.16, based on a target market value capital structure of 10 percent debt
to 90 percent equity, with the cost of equity at 8.0 percent and pretax cost of debt at
4.5 percent.
Our estimate of Heineken’s target capital structure (10 percent debt to 90 percent
equity) is based on historical analysis. Heineken’s current capital structure using market values is 24 percent debt to 76 percent equity, as shown in Exhibit 10.17 on page
334, but the current capital structure is higher than Heineken’s historical norm (see
Exhibit 10.18 on p. 334). Heineken historically has had less than 10 percent debt. Its
debt in 2002 and 2003 is higher because of recent acquisitions. In light of Heineken’s
excess cash balances, significant cash flow, and conservative dividend, we expect the
company to reduce its debt levels significantly within a few years. So we selected a
conservative long-term capital structure of 10 percent debt.

Exhibit 10.16 Heineken: Weighted Average Cost of Capital
percent

Debt
Common equity
Total

Target capital
structure
10.0
90.0
100.0

Cost
4.5
8.0

Tax benefit
35

Weighted
cost
0.3
7.2
7.5

334

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

Exhibit 10.17 Heineken: Current Capital Structure
Book value
€ million
Short term debt
1,113
Long term debt
2,721
Retirement related liabilities
526
Total debt
4,360

Percent of total
capitalization
14
33
6
53

Market value
€ million
1,113
2,809
526
4,448

Percent of total
capitalization
6
15
3
24

Common equity
Minority interest
Total equity

3,167
732
3,899

38
9
47

13,171
1,030
14,201

71
5
76

Total capitalization

8,259

100

18,649

100

Even though we did not use Heineken’s year-end 2003 capital structure, we present its calculation in Exhibit 10.17, as follows:
• Short-term debt: Short-term debt matures within one year, so in most cases,
book value approximates market value.
• Long-term debt: None of Heineken’s debt is publicly traded, so market quotes
were unavailable. Heineken supplied limited information on its long-term debt
issues. For the debt instruments for which we had information, we used the current face value, years to maturity, coupon rate, and opportunity cost of debt to
estimate the market value by discounting the expected cash flows to the present (see Exhibit 10.19). For long-term debt where no information was available,
we assumed the current book value was a reasonable proxy for market value.

Exhibit 10.18 Heineken: Historical Capital Structure
Debt/(debt and equity) at market value
30%
24

25%
20%

17

15%
10%

8
6

6

5%
0%
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

HEINEKEN CASE

335

Exhibit 10.19 Heineken: Market Value of Long-Term Debt

Debt issue
Bond loan from credit institution
Bond loan from credit institution
Loan from credit institution
Loan from credit institution
Other issues
Total long-term debt

Coupon
rate
percent
4.4
5.0
5.3
4.1

Book value
€ million
497
596
387
506
735
2,721

Year of
maturity
2010
2013
2008
2008

Market value
€ million
496
624
414
540
735
2,809

• Retirement-related liabilities: We estimated the market value of net retirementrelated liabilities to be equal to the actuarial value in the footnotes, which for
Heineken also equals its book value.
• Common equity: In late February 2004, the market value of Heineken’s equity
was €13.2 billion, based on a share price of €33.65 and a total of 392 million
shares outstanding.
• Minority interest: To estimate a market value for minority interest, we applied a
peer-average P/E multiple of 15.6 to Heineken’s minority-interest income in
2003. Given minority-interest income in 2003 of 66 million, we estimated the
market value of minority interest to be €1.0 billion.
We estimated the cost of Heineken’s debt and equity as follows:
• Cost of debt: We assumed that Heineken’s opportunity cost of debt equals that
of the similarly rated companies (as expressed as a premium over the risk-free
rate). Although Heineken has not been rated by S&P or Moody’s, we have
assumed that its rating would be similar to highly rated beer companies. In the
Netherlands, the default premium for investment-grade companies comparable
to Heineken was about 40 basis points in February 2004. Since the euro riskfree rate in February was 4.1 percent, the opportunity cost of debt is 4.5
percent before taxes, or 2.9 percent after taxes.
• Cost of equity: Using the capital asset pricing model, we estimated Heineken’s
cost of equity to be 8.0 percent based on a euro risk-free rate of 4.1 percent,42
a market risk premium of 5.2 percent,43 and a levered beta of approximately
0.75 rounded. The levered beta is based on the median of the unlevered betas
for a sample of brewers (0.66), shown in Exhibit 10.20 on page 336, relevered to
Heineken’s target capital structure (debt-to-value ratio of 10 percent). To unlever and relever the betas, we used the formula βl = βu × (1 + D/E), as explained
42
We used the yield on German treasury bonds for the risk-free rate, as they are the most liquid and
have the lowest yield to maturity.
43
The market risk premium is based on a 7.0 percent real return on equities less the real return on
the risk-free rate of 1.8 percent at the time of the Heineken valuation.

336

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL

Exhibit 10.20 Beer Industry Unlevered Betas
Company name
Anheuser-Busch

0.53

Heineken

0.53

Kirin

0.58

Fosters

0.59

Asahi Breweries

0.62

Carlsberg A/S

0.66

Median

0.66

Mean

0.67

Scottish & Newcastle

0.68

Interbrew
SAB Miller
Boston Beer

0.75
0.78
0.83

Coors

0.86

earlier in this chapter. In the brewing industry, the range of unlevered betas was
0.53 to 0.86, and the median and mean were almost identical (0.66 and 0.67,
respectively). As we mentioned earlier, individual companies’ betas are difficult
to measure, so we typically use the industry median rather than a company’s
measured beta unless we have specific reasons to believe that the company’s
beta should differ from the industry.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Identify and describe five key principles of computing WACC.
2. Present, in its simplest form, the WACC formula. Why should a
manager compute an after-tax cost of debt and not an after-tax cost
of equity when determining WACC?
3. Present, in its simplest form, the E(Ri) formula, based upon the
CAPM. What should a manager consider when selecting an appropriate risk free rate of return?

REVIEW QUESTIONS

337

4. How does an arithmetic average differ from a geometric average?
When might one approach be preferred over the other?
5. What is survivorship bias? How does survivorship bias impact a
manager’s computation and use of historical market returns?
6. Using an average of historical returns to determine the market risk
premium is often described as backward looking while reverse engineering the key value driver formula is described as forward looking. Identify the differences between the two approaches in terms of
the data used in the computation of E[Ri] or ke for each model.
7. Identify three key characteristics of the raw data needed for computing the CAPM.
8. What is the purpose of unlevering beta? What useful information
can be gained from comparing the unlevered beta of a company
compared to the unlevered beta of its industry? What is the purpose
of relevering the industry’s beta by the market value of your corporation’s debt position?
9. Identify the strengths and weaknesses of the three E[Ri] or ke models
presented in Chapter 10 (CAPM, APT, and Fama-French). Which
model would you recommend a manager select to compute a company’s estimate of E[Ri] or ke? Explain.
10. What is the basis for using the company’s target capital structure
versus the current capital structure when estimating WACC?

s

11

Calculating and
Interpreting Results
After finishing your financial projections and continuing-value estimate,
you are ready to conclude your valuation. In this chapter, we show how to
take the final steps to create a complete valuation:
• Discount forecasted cash flows or economic profits and continuing
value to determine the present value of operations.
• Calculate equity value from the present value of operations by
adding the value of nonoperating assets and subtracting the value of
nonequity claims.
• Use scenarios to deal better with the uncertainty underlying the
final valuation.
• Examine valuation results to ensure that your findings are technically
correct, your assumptions realistic, and your interpretations plausible.
This chapter focuses on calculating and interpreting results for the two
most widely used approaches: enterprise DCF and discounted economic
profit. In Chapter 5, we also discussed several valuation alternatives such
as the APV, capital cash flow, and cash-flow-to-equity approach. To a large
extent, the key messages about calculation and interpretation of results
also apply to the alternative approaches. When they do not, we will state
this explicitly.

CALCULATE VALUE OF OPERATIONS
From the free cash flow and economic profit projections, calculate the present value of operations in three steps: discount free cash flows, discount
339

340

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS

continuing value, and sum the resulting values to determine the value of
operations.

Discount Free Cash Flows
The first step is to discount each year’s free cash flow (or economic profit)
to the present, using the WACC. For most valuations, future cash flow is
discounted by a constant WACC. If you have chosen to vary the WACC over
time, however, ensure that you are consistent in the way you discount future cash flows.1 A time-varying WACC is appropriate if the yield curve is
sharply increasing or decreasing or if significant changes are expected in,
for example, the capital market weights for debt and equity, the cost of debt,
or the tax rate. Such changes could occur for a company that is at a very low
or high leverage and will converge to a sustainable, long-term capital structure. In that case, however, the APV approach is preferable, because it more
easily allows for explicit modeling of the capital structure and debt-related
tax shields over time.

Discount the Continuing Value
Next, discount the continuing value to the present. If you calculate continuing value using the perpetuity-based approach we presented in Chapter 9,
bear in mind that the continuing value is already expressed as a value in
the last year of the explicit forecast period. Therefore, you should discount
it by the number of years in the explicit forecast. For example, if the forecast
has 10 years, discount the continuing value by 10 years, not 11 years. In addition, if WACC varies over the explicit forecast period, remember to follow the approach described in the previous section when discounting
continuing value.

Calculate the Value of Operations
The third and final step is to add the present value of free cash flow in the
explicit period to the present value of the continuing value. The resulting
value is called the value of operations. In the economic profit approach, invested capital at the beginning of the forecast period must be added to discounted economic profits and continuing value.2
1
If the WACC varies over time, ensure that the discount factor DF T for the free cash f low in year
T is properly defined as:
T

DFT = ∏ (1 + WACCt )
t =1

where WACCt = Cost of capital for year t
This should be the invested capital at the end of the last historical year.

2

CALCULATE EQUITY VALUE

341

The value of operations should be adjusted for midyear discounting.
We often assume that cash flows occur continuously throughout the year
rather than in a lump sum at the end of the year. To adjust for this discrepancy, we grow the discounted value of operations at the WACC for six
months.

CALCULATE EQUITY VALUE
Discounting cash flows or economic profits to obtain the value of operations was fairly straightforward. Calculating the equity value from the
value of operations is a bit more complex. For all the valuation approaches
discussed in Chapter 5, except the cash-flow-to-equity approach, there are
two general rules:
1. All assets and liabilities whose cash flows are not included in the DCF
value of operations must be separately valued and added to or subtracted from the DCF valuation. This holds for both on-balance-sheet
and off-balance-sheet assets and liabilities (see Exhibit 11.1 on p. 342).
2. The best valuation approach for these assets and liabilities depends
on the degree to which their value changes with the DCF value of operations. For example, the value of employee stock options and convertible bonds will increase as the value of operations increases, and
your valuation approach should reflect this.
• If there is a strong dependency between nonoperating assets and
nonequity claims on one hand and the value of operations on the
other, make sure the assumptions underlying your estimates are
fully consistent with those underlying the DCF value of operations. This applies to employee stock options, convertible bonds,
debt in distressed companies, and sometimes to nonconsolidated
subsidiaries.3
• If there is little or no dependency, as in the case of marketable securities, you can use the current market value when available or perform a DCF valuation if not. Use book values only when they are a
good approximation of market value or as a method of last resort.
3

Assume that your DCF valuation of operations implies a value per share significantly above
the current market price per share. In this case, you should not deduct convertibles or options
as nonequity claims at their current market value but at the higher value implied by your DCF
results. Similarly, the current market value of nonconsolidated subsidiaries may need upward
adjust ment if their operations are closely related to those of the parent company. Finally, if the
company is in financial distress with debt trading at a significant discount, deducting debt at
the current market value will lead to an overestimation of equity value because the value of
debt should increase with the value of operations.

342

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS

Exhibit 11.1 Example Valuation Buildup
$ million
Value of operations1
Excess cash and marketable securities
Illiquid investment and nonconsolidated subsidiaries
Loans
Nonconsolidated subsidiaries

5,000
50
20
250
270

Other nonoperating assets
Tax loss carry forwards
Discontinued operations
Excess real estate

10
30
5
45
5,365

Enterprise value
Interest-bearing debt
Bank loans
Bonds

Nonoperating assets

(250)
(550)
(800)

Debt equivalents
Operating leases
Unfunded pensions and other retirement liabilities
Preferred equity
Long-term operating provisions
Nonoperating provisions
Contingent liabilities

(250)
(150)
(100)
(50)
(75)
(40)

Nonequity claims

(665)
Hybrid claims
Employee stock options
Convertible debt
Minority interests
Equity value

(100)
(200)
(300)
(150)
3,450

1Discounted value of free cash flows.

If you have applied the cash-flow-to-equity approach, there are fewer
adjustments to the DCF result because the valuation already represents an
estimate of the (undiluted) equity value. However, in some cases, you must
still adjust for outstanding stock options or other convertible securities.

Nonoperating Assets
When reorganizing the company’s accounting statements in Chapter 7, we
classified particular assets as nonoperating assets. Cash flows related to
these assets are not included in the free cash flow (or economic profit), and
therefore are not accounted for in the value of operations. Although not included in operations, they still represent value to the shareholder. Thus,
you must assess the present value of each nonoperating asset separately and

CALCULATE EQUITY VALUE

343

add the resulting value to the value of operations. In this section, we identify the most common nonoperating assets and describe how to handle
these in the valuation.
If necessary, you should take into account any special circumstances
that could affect shareholders’ ability to capture the full market value of
these assets. For example, if the company has announced it will sell off a
nonoperating asset in the near term, you should deduct the estimated capital gains taxes (if any) on the asset from its market value.

Excess cash and marketable securities Nonoperating assets that can be
converted into cash on short notice and at low cost are classified as excess
cash and marketable securities. Under U.S. GAAP and IFRS, companies
must report such assets at their fair market value on the balance sheet.
Therefore, you can use the most recent book values as a proxy for the market value—unless you have reason to believe they have significantly
changed in value since the reporting date (as in the case of high-risk equity
holdings).
In general, we do not recommend valuing highly liquid nonoperating
assets if the market values are available. If you decide to perform a DCF valuation of nonoperating securities, estimate meaningful cash flow projections, and discount these at the appropriate cost of capital, which in general
is not equal to the company’s WACC. For example, discounting future cash
flows from government bonds and Treasury bills at the company’s WACC
will lead to an undervaluation because the appropriate cost of capital is the
risk-free rate.
Illiquid investments and nonconsolidated subsidiaries This category of
nonoperating assets typically includes loans and equity stakes in subsidiaries that are not consolidated in the company’s financial statements.
These assets are not easily converted into cash, so they are recorded on the
balance sheet at historical cost, not at fair market value.
For loans to other companies, use the reported book value. This is a reasonable approximation of market value if the loans were given at fair market
terms and if the borrower’s credit risk and general interest rates have not
changed significantly since issuance. If this is not the case, you should perform a separate DCF valuation of the promised interest and principal payments at the yield to maturity for corporate bonds with similar risk and
maturity.
Nonconsolidated subsidiaries are companies in which the parent company
holds a noncontrolling equity stake. Under U.S. GAAP and IFRS, this generally applies to equity stakes below 50 percent.4 Because the parent company
does not have formal control over these subsidiaries, their financials are not
4

See Chapter 21 for more details on consolidation under U.S. GAAP and IFRS.

344

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS

consolidated. Under U.S. GAAP and IFRS, there are two ways in which nonconsolidated subsidiaries can appear in the parent company’s accounts:
1. For equity stakes between 20 percent and 50 percent, the parent company is assumed to have inf luence but not control over the subsidiary.
The equity holding in the subsidiary is reported in the parent balance sheet at the investment’s historical cost plus profits and additional investment, less dividends received. The parent company’s
portion of the subsidiary’s profits is shown below EBIT on the income statement.
2. For equity stakes below 20 percent, the parent company is assumed
to have no inf luence. The equity holdings are shown at historical cost
on the parent’s balance sheet. The parent’s portion of the subsidiary’s dividends is included below EBIT on the income statement.
The best approach to handling these subsidiaries depends on the information available:
• If the subsidiary is publicly listed, use the market value for the company’s equity stake. Verify that the market value is indeed a good indicator of intrinsic value. In some cases, these listed subsidiaries
have very limited free float and/or very low liquidity, so the share
price may not properly reflect current information.
• If the subsidiary is not listed but you have access to its financial statements, perform a separate DCF valuation of the equity stake. Discount the cash flows at the appropriate cost of capital, which is not
necessarily the parent company’s WACC. Also, when completing the
parent valuation, include only the value of the parent’s equity stake
and not the subsidiary’s entire enterprise value or equity value.
If the parent company’s accounts are the only source of financial information for the subsidiary, we suggest the following alternatives:
• Simplified cash-f low-to-equity valuation: This is a feasible approach when
the parent has a 20 to 50 percent equity stake, because the subsidiary’s
net income and approximate book equity5 are disclosed in the parent’s
accounts. Build forecasts for how the key value drivers (net income
growth and return on equity) will develop, so you can project future
cash flows to equity. Discount these cash flows at the cost of equity for
the subsidiary in question and not at the parent company’s WACC.
• Multiples valuation: If the parent has a 20 to 50 percent equity stake,
you can also build a valuation based on the price-to-earnings and/or
5
The book value of the subsidiary equals the historical acquisition cost plus retained profits,
which is a reasonable approximation of book equity. In case any goodwill is included in the
book value of the subsidiary, this should be deducted.

CALCULATE EQUITY VALUE

345

market-to-book multiple. Net income and approximate book equity
for the subsidiary are available, and you can estimate an appropriate
multiple from a group of listed peers.
• Tracking portfolio: For parent equity stakes below 20 percent, you may
have no information beyond the investment’s original cost, that is,
the book value shown in the parent’s balance sheet. Even applying a
multiple is difficult because neither net income nor the current book
value of equity is reported. If you know when the stake was acquired,
you can approximate its current market value by adding the relative
price increase for a portfolio of comparable stocks over the same
holding period.
You should triangulate your results as much as possible, given the lack of
precision for these valuation approaches.

Other nonoperating assets The preceding categories are typically the
most significant nonoperating assets from a valuation perspective. But companies can also have several other types of nonoperating assets such as tax
loss carryforwards, excess real estate, and pension assets, to name a few.
These assets are not necessarily reported separately on a company’s balance
sheet, so they can be hard to identify.
Tax loss carryforwards—or net operating losses (NOLs), as they are
called in the United States—represent accumulated historical losses that a
company can use to compensate future tax charges. Tax loss carryforwards
are included in the tax assets on the balance sheet and discussed in the company’s footnotes. From an outsider’s perspective, it is difficult to accurately
estimate the true value of tax loss carryforwards, because they do not necessarily offset the cash taxes as derived from the consolidated income statement. For example, for companies with foreign subsidiaries, you would
need to know tax losses and future taxable profits on a country-by-country
basis, because domestic tax losses cannot offset foreign taxable profits, and
vice versa.
Do not confuse tax loss carryforwards with ongoing deferred tax assets
as defined in Chapter 7. Ongoing deferred tax assets should not be included
in nonoperating assets because they are already explicitly accounted for in
the calculation of the cash tax rate.
Estimate the value of the tax loss carryforwards separately and not as
part of free cash flow. Create a separate account for the accumulated tax
loss carryforwards, and forecast the development of this account by
adding any future losses and subtracting any future taxable profits on a
year-by-year basis. For each year in which the account is used to offset taxable profits, discount the tax savings at the cost of debt.6 Some practitioners
6

If the tax loss carryforwards are relatively small compared with near-term taxable profits, the
amount of future tax savings will not f luctuate much with the company’s profitability, and the
cost of debt is most appropriate. The higher the tax losses relative to near-term profits, the more

346

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS

simply set the carryforward’s value at the tax rate times the accumulated
tax losses.
A second, more complex alternative, is to adjust both the tax rate used
in the free cash flow projections and in the WACC during years for which
the company can offset (part of) its tax charges. In this case, the value of tax
loss carryforwards is included in the DCF value of operations and should
not be double counted as a nonoperating asset.
Discontinued operations are businesses being sold or closed down. The
earnings from discontinued operations are explicitly shown in the income
statement, and the associated net asset position is disclosed on the balance sheet. Because discontinued operations are no longer part of a company’s operations, their value should not be modeled as part of free cash
flow or included in the DCF value of operations. Under U.S. GAAP and
IFRS, the assets and liabilities associated with the discontinued operations are written down to their fair value and disclosed as a net asset
on the balance sheet, so the most recent book value is usually a reasonable
approximation.7
Excess real estate and other unutilized assets are assets no longer required
for the company’s operations. As a result, any cash flows that the assets
could generate are excluded from the free cash flow projection, and the assets are not included in the DCF value of operations. Identifying these
assets in an outside-in valuation is nearly impossible unless they are
specifically disclosed in the company’s footnotes. Therefore, including
their value separately as a nonoperating asset is often limited to internal
valuations. For excess real estate, use the most recent appraisal value when
available. Alternatively, estimate the real estate value either by using an
appraisal multiple such as value per square meter or by discounting expected future cash flows from rentals at the appropriate cost of capital. Of
course, be careful to exclude any operating real estate from these figures,
because that value is implicitly included in the free cash flow projections
and value of operations.
We do not recommend a separate valuation for unutilized operating
assets unless they are expected to be sold in the near-term. If the financial
projections for the company reflect growth, the value of any underutilized
assets should instead be captured in lower future capital expenditures.
Surpluses in a company’s pension funds show up as net pension assets in
the balance sheet. We will describe in detail how to value pension assets
during our discussion of pension liabilities.
the value of tax savings will f luctuate with profits, and the more appropriate the unlevered cost
of capital becomes. This is consistent with our recommendation in Chapter 5 to use the unlevered cost of capital to discount the expected future tax savings from the interest on debt.
7
Any upward adjust ment to the original book value of assets and liabilities is limited to the cumulative historical impairments on the assets. Thus, the fair market value of discontinued operations could be higher than the net asset value disclosed in the balance sheet.

CALCULATE EQUITY VALUE

347

Nonequity Claims
The value of operations plus nonoperating assets equals the enterprise
value. To calculate the value of common equity, you need to deduct the
value of all the nonequity claims from the enterprise value. Although nonequity claims include a long array of items, they can be grouped into four
categories (shown in Exhibit 11.1):
1. Debt such as bonds, short-term and long-term bank loans
2. Debt equivalents such as operating leases, pensions, specific types of
provisions, preferred stock, and contingent liabilities (e.g., outstanding claims from litigation)
3. Hybrid claims such as employee stock options and convertible bonds
4. Minority interests
For the purpose of exposition, we use the term nonequity claims to represent all financial claims other than those from current common stockholders. For example, even though convertible debt and employee options can be
converted into common equity, we group them under nonequity claims.
Note that even in a discounted-cash-flow-to-equity valuation, you must
deduct the value of employee stock options and convertible debt or convertible preferred equity8 to estimate the value of common equity.
In this section, we provide an overview of the most frequently encountered nonequity claims and recommend how to include them in a company valuation.

Debt Corporate debt comes in many forms: commercial paper, notes
payable, fixed and floating bank loans, corporate bonds, and capitalized
leases. If the debt is relatively secure and actively traded, use its market
value. If the debt instrument is not traded, discount the promised interest
payments and the principal repayment at the yield to maturity to estimate
current value. The book value of debt is a reasonable approximation for
fixed-rate debt if interest rates and default risk have not significantly
changed since the debt issuance. For floating-rate debt, market value is not
sensitive to interest rates, and book value is a reasonable approximation if
the company’s default risk has been fairly stable.
For companies in financial distress, you must be careful when valuing
debt. For distressed companies, the value of the debt will be at a significant
discount to its book value and will fluctuate with the value of the enterprise.
Essentially, the debt has become similar to equity: its value will depend
8
For convertible debt (preferred equity), only the interest (preferred dividend) payments are included in the equity cash f low projections. The value of the conversion option still needs to be
deducted from the equity DCF result.

348

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS

directly on your estimate for the enterprise value, and you should not simply deduct the current market value of debt. If sound economic forecasts put
your DCF estimate of enterprise value significantly above its current market value and you deduct the current market value of debt to determine equity, you are underestimating the true value of debt and overestimating the
equity value. The reason is that as the enterprise value increases, the value
of debt increases as well.
For distressed companies, apply an integrated-scenario approach to
value operations as well as equity. For each scenario, estimate the enterprise value conditional on your financial forecasts, deduct the full value9 of
the debt and other nonequity claims,10 and calculate the equity value as the
residual (which should be zero for any scenario where the conditional enterprise value is less than the value of debt plus other nonequity claims).
Next, weight each scenario’s conditional value of equity by its probability of
occurrence to obtain an estimate for the value of equity. In the same way,
you can calculate the point estimates for enterprise value and debt value
(for an example, see the section on scenario valuation later in this chapter).

Operating leases These are the most common form of off-balance-sheet
debt. Under certain restrictions, companies can avoid capitalizing leases on
their balance sheet. For these so-called operating leases, rental charges are
included in operating costs, and required future payments are disclosed in
the notes to the balance sheet.
Following the guidelines outlined in Chapter 7, capitalize the value of
the operating leases as part of invested capital and as a debt-equivalent liability. Add the estimated after-tax interest component from the lease back
to operating profit on the income statement. By doing this, you effectively
treat the leased assets as if they were owned and financed with straight
debt. Therefore, you need to deduct the capitalized value of operating
leases as a nonequity claim. Estimate this value with the following formula:
Capitalized Operating Leases = Asset Value =

Rental Expense


1
 kd +

Asset Life 

where kd = Cost of debt

Unfunded pension and other postretirement liabilities Unfunded retirement liabilities should be treated as debt-equivalents. They can make a signif9

That is, the value of the debt for a nondistressed company—typically close to book value.
All nonequity claims need to be included in the scenario approach for distressed companies.
The order in which they are entitled to claim the enterprise value will make a difference for the
value of debt and other claims, but not for the equity value.
10

CALCULATE EQUITY VALUE

349

Exhibit 11.2 Distribution of Unfunded US Pension Liability by Industry
$ billion
Companies with unfunded liabilities
greater than 10% of enterprise value

All companies
Number of
companies
Automotive
8

Unfunded
pension liability
50

Airlines

Unfunded
pension liability
21

Aerospace and
defense

12

18

21

Automotive
suppliers

10

7

14

18

Industrial
machinery

10

4

Utilities

91

17

Chemicals and
steel

12

6

Chemicals

32

13

Other

92

20

Total

144

76

Aerospace and
defense

71

Airlines

21

Integrated oil
and gas

26

Number of
companies
8

Other

6,174

169

Total

6,412

314

Source: Compustat, McKinsey analysis.

icant difference when calculating equity value, especially for older companies.
As Exhibit 11.2 shows, unfunded pension liabilities are significant, amounting
to $314 billion for listed U.S. companies in 2002. These liabilities are concentrated in the automotive, aerospace, airline, oil and gas, and utility sectors.
Postretirement liabilities typically originate from pension plans and
postretirement medical benefit plans. Plans are designated as either defined contribution or defined benefit. If a plan is structured on a definedcontribution basis, it is not relevant from a valuation perspective. In this
case, the company makes fixed contributions into a fund, whose investment
performance determines an employee’s eventual benefits. The company is
only liable to contribute a predetermined amount, and the employees bear
the risk of inadequate performance of fund assets.
However, for defined-benefit plans, the company is obliged to provide specific retirement benefits to employees irrespective of the actual performance
of the plan’s funds. Under U.S. GAAP and IFRS, the fair market value of the
plan’s assets and liabilities are disclosed in the financial statements, but only
in the footnotes. The resulting surplus (deficit) should be added to (subtracted from) enterprise value on an after-tax basis.
Do not use the book value of net retirement assets or liabilities as reported
on the balance sheet. That amount does not include all of the capital gains and
losses on the fund assets, nor recent changes to the fund’s liabilities.
We illustrate our recommended approach through an analysis of the retirement liabilities for a large U.S. company. Exhibit 11.3 on page 350 shows a

350

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS

Exhibit 11.3 Company Pension and Postretirement Liabilities, 2004
$ million
2004 Balance Sheet

2004 Notes to the balance sheet

Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents
Accounts receivable
Inventories
Other current assets
Total current assets

32
490
795
164
1,481

Plant assets, net of depreciation
Goodwill
Other intangible assets
Other assets
Total assets

1,901
1,900
1,095
298
6,675

Current liabilities
Notes payable
Payable to suppliers and others
Accrued liabilities1
Dividend payable
Accrued income taxes
Total current liabilities

810
607
607
65
250
2,339

Long-term debt
2,543
Nonpension postretirement benefits 298
Other liabilities
621
Total liabilities
5,801
Shareowners' equity
Preferred stock
0
Capital stock
20
Additional paid-in capital
264
Earnings retained in the business
5,642
Capital stock in treasury
(4,848)
Accum. other comprehensive loss
(204)
Total shareowners’ equity
874
Total liabilities and equity

Change in benefit obligation
Obligation at beginning of year
Acquisition adjustment
Service cost
Interest cost
Plan amendments
Actuarial loss
Participant contributions
Curtailment/special termination benefits
Benefits paid
Foreign currency adjustment
Benefit obligation at end of year

Pension
1,798
–
50
111
(3)
23
3
3
(119)
27
1,893

Change in fair value of plan assets
Fair value at beginning of year
Acquisition adjustment
Actual return on plan assets
Employer contributions
Participants contributions
Benefits paid
Foreign currency adjustment
Fair value at end of year

1,472
–
184
65
3
(115)
18
1,627

Funded status recognized
Funded status at end of year
Unrecognized prior service cost
Unrecognized loss
Net amount recognized

(266)
42
661
437

Amounts recognized
Prepaid benefit cost (included in Other Assets)
Intangible asset (incl. in Other Intangible Assets)
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
Net amount recognized

103
27
307
437

Nonpension
373
–
4
23
(21)
(19)
–
–
(27)
–
333

(333)
(33)
49
(317)

6,675

1

The current portion of nonpension postretirement liabilities included in accrued liabilities was $19 million at August 1, 2004
and August 3, 2003.

summary of the company’s balance sheet and the overview of retirement liabilities in the footnotes. As of August 2004, the balance sheet has just one
specific entry for retirement-related liabilities of $298 million. However, this
is an incomplete picture. First, this liability represents only the nonpension
postretirement benefits that the company provides. The assets and liabilities
for pension benefits are hidden within other entries in the balance sheet.

CALCULATE EQUITY VALUE

351

Second, under U.S. GAAP, the amounts recognized in the balance sheet for
pension and other retirement liabilities do not necessarily represent the fair
value of the liabilities. In fact, for many companies, the book values in the
balance sheet differ significantly from the fair value.
The notes to the balance sheet provide critical information for analyzing and valuing the company’s retirement liabilities. Focus first on the
pension benefits. The fair value of the total pension liabilities is $1,893 million, whereas the fair value of the fund assets is $1,627 million. Because of
this underfunding, the pension plan represents a net liability to the company with a fair value of $266 million. However, since a portion of the
losses and prior costs for the plan are classified as unrecognized losses and
costs under U.S. GAAP, the book value in the balance sheet is higher. This
occurs because annual gains and losses from plan assets are not charged
to the income statement immediately, but only gradually over the course
of several years. In our example, the company recognizes the pension plan
as a net asset of $437 million (instead of a net liability of $266 million).
The notes discuss how this net amount is spread out across multiple
balance sheet categories: Other Assets, Other Intangible Assets, and Shareholders’ Equity.
For the nonpension postretirement benefits, the fair value of the liability is $333 million, another net liability because there are no fund assets.
Again, this value differs from the $317 million recognized as book value on
the balance sheet—although not by a large amount. The book amount corresponds to the $298 million explicitly shown as a line item on the balance
sheet plus an additional $19 million included in Accrued Liabilities.
In this case, the company’s total net liability at fair value equals $599
million ($266 million for pension benefits plus $333 million for nonpension retirement benefits). On an after-tax basis, this converts to $389 million, which should be subtracted from enterprise value as a nonequity
claim.11
To avoid double counting, make sure all other nonequity claims or nonoperating assets do not include retirement assets and liabilities. For example, in our case, $103 million of pension assets are included on the balance
sheet under Other Assets. In the event you classify Other Assets as nonoperating assets, you should at least take out the $103 million before adding
Other Assets to the equity value buildup.

Preferred equity The name preferred equity is somewhat misleading; preferred stock more closely resembles unsecured debt than equity and should
be treated as a debt equivalent. Preferred stock dividends are similar to interest payments because they are often predetermined and can be withheld
only under special conditions. If preferred equity is traded, use the market
11

This example uses a nominal tax rate of 35 percent.

352

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS

value to deduct from enterprise value. In other cases, make a separate DCF
valuation, discounting the expected preferred dividends in perpetuity at
the cost of unsecured debt.

Other debt equivalents This category includes all remaining liabilities for
which no cash flows are included in the company’s free cash flow projections. Here we discuss two examples: provisions and contingent liabilities.
Certain provisions other than retirement-related liabilities need to be deducted as nonequity financial claims. Following the guidelines in Chapter
7, we distinguish four types of provisions:
1. Ongoing operating provisions (e.g., for warranties and product returns) are already accounted for in the free cash flows and should
therefore not be deducted from enterprise value.
2. Long-term operating provisions (e.g., for plant-decommissioning costs)
should be deducted from enterprise value as debt equivalents. Because
these provisions cover cash expenses that become payable in the long
term, they are typically recorded at the discounted value in the balance
sheet. In this case, there is no need to perform a separate DCF analysis,
and you can use the book value of the liability in your valuation. Note
that the book value does not equal the present value of all future expenses because the provision is gradually accumulated over the years
until the expense becomes payable (see Chapter 7 for more details).
3. Nonoperating provisions (e.g., for restructuring charges resulting
from layoffs) must be deducted from enterprise value as a debt
equivalent. Although a discounted value would be ideal, the book
value from the balance sheet is often a reasonable approximation.
These provisions are recorded at a nondiscounted value because outlays are usually in the near term.
4. Income-smoothing provisions do not represent actual future cash
outlays, so they should not be deducted from enterprise value. These
provisions were common in several European countries but will disappear after 2005, when most European countries adopt IFRS.
Contingent liabilities are usually not disclosed in the balance sheet but are
separately discussed in the notes to the balance sheet. Examples are possible liabilities from pending litigation and loan guarantees. When possible,
estimate the associated expected after-tax cash flows (if the costs are tax
deductible), and discount these at the cost of debt. Unfortunately, assessing
the probability of such cash flows materializing is difficult, so the valuation
should be interpreted with caution. Therefore, estimate the value of contingent liabilities for a range of probabilities to provide some boundaries on
your final valuation.

CALCULATE EQUITY VALUE

353

Employee stock options Many companies offer their employees stock options as part of their compensation. Options give the holder the right, but
not the obligation, to buy company stock at a specified price, known as the
exercise price. Since employee stock options have long maturities and the
company’s stock price could eventually rise above the exercise price, options can have great value.
Employee stock options affect a company valuation in two ways. First, the
value of options that will be granted in the future needs to be captured in
the free cash flow projections or in a separate DCF valuation, following the
guidelines in Chapter 7. When captured in the free cash flow projections, the
value of future options grants is included in the value of operations and
should not be treated as a nonequity claim. Second, the value of options currently outstanding must be subtracted from enterprise value as a nonequity
claim. Note, however, that the value of the options will depend on your estimate of enterprise value, and your option valuation should reflect this.
Under U.S. GAAP and IFRS, the notes disclose considerable information
about employee options, including the number of options currently outstanding grouped by exercise prices and maturities, as well as the number
of options that are vested. In general, employee options are unvested at the
time of granting. Options can be exercised or sold only after they are vested,
which usually happens over several years of continuous employment. For
valuation purposes, deduct the value of all vested options. For unvested options, make an adjustment to account for the likelihood that some employees will leave the company and never exercise their options.
The following approaches can be used for valuing employee options:
• We recommend using the estimated market value from option-valuation
models, such as Black-Scholes or more advanced binomial (lattice) models. Under U.S. GAAP and IFRS, the notes to the balance sheet report
the total value of all employee stock options outstanding, as estimated
by such option-pricing models. Note that this value is a good approximation only if your estimate of share price is close to the one underlying the option values in the annual report. Otherwise, you need to
create a new valuation using an option-pricing model. The notes disclose the information required for valuation.12
• A second method, the exercise value approach, provides only a lower
bound for the value of employee options. It assumes that all options
are exercised immediately and thereby ignores the time value of the
options. The resulting valuation error increases as options have
longer time to maturity, the company’s stock has higher volatility,
12
For more on the valuation of employee stock options, see, for example, J. Hull and A. White,
“How to Value Employee Stock Options,” Financial Analysts Journal, 60(1) ( January/February
2004): 114 –119.

354

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS

Exhibit 11.4 Employee Stock Options Example

Company data
Enterprise value ($ million)
Debt value ($ million)
Nondiluted equity
value ($ million)
Number of shares nondiluted
Value per share nondiluted

11,000
(1,000)
10,000
90.0
111.1

Stock options
Number of options outstanding
10.0
Option exercise price
90.0
Option maturity (years)
5.0
Stock volatility (annualized percent) 35.0
Risk free rate (percent)
5.5

Enterprise value ($ million)
Debt value ($ million)
Option exercise
proceeds ($ million)
Option value ($ million)
Equity value ($ million)

Option
value
method
11,000
(1,000)

Exercise
value
method
11,000
(1,000)
900

(481)
9,519

10,900

Number of shares nondiluted
Number of new shares
Number of shares diluted

90.0
–
90.0

90.0
10.0
100.0

Value per share

105.8

109.0

and the company’s share price is closer to the exercise price. Given
that a more accurate valuation is already disclosed in the annual report, we do not recommend this method. However, it is still quite
common among practitioners.
Exhibit 11.4 provides a brief example of these two methods. Assume
that you have estimated the enterprise value of a company at $11 billion.
The company has straight debt with a market value of $1 billion and 10 million unexercised, fully vested stock options. The number of common shares
currently outstanding is 90 million. The exercise price for all options is $90,
which will acquire one share of common stock. If you did not value the options separately but simply divided the nondiluted equity value by the
number of undiluted shares, you would overestimate the value per share at
$111.1 instead of the true value of $105.8, derived next.
The column titled “Option value method” in Exhibit 11.4 shows the
equity value per share when employee options are incorporated using an
option valuation model. We assume a remaining time to maturity of five
years for the options, a risk-free rate of 5.5 percent, and a volatility of the
company’s stock of 35 percent. Applying a Black-Scholes option-pricing
model adjusted for the dilution effect, the estimated market value of the
options amounts to $481 million.13 The value per share of common equity
is then $105.8.
13

For illustration purposes, we adjusted the Black-Scholes option price only for the dilution effect of new-share issuance by multiplying the option price by the following expression:
Number of Existing Shares Outstanding

( Number of Existing Shares Outstanding + Number of New Shares Issued )

CALCULATE EQUITY VALUE

355

The exercise value method overestimates the value per share of common
equity because it assumes immediate conversion of all options. The only advantage of the method is that it is simple to apply. Assuming full conversion, the company in this example receives $900 million in exercise proceeds
and would have to provide 10 million common shares to the option holders.
In the exercise value method, the company either retains the exercise proceeds or uses these to repay debt so that the resulting equity value will
amount to $10.9 billion. Taking into account the 10 million shares handed
out to the options holders, the resulting value per share is $109.
In this simplified example, the valuation error from applying the exercise value method is only 3 percent. However, for companies with a relatively large number of options outstanding or exercise prices well above the
current stock price, the difference can be quite significant.

Convertible debt Convertible bonds are corporate bonds that can be exchanged for common equity at a predetermined conversion ratio. A convertible bond is essentially a package of a straight corporate bond plus a call
option on equity (the conversion option).14 Because the conversion option
can have significant value, this form of debt requires treatment different
from that of regular corporate debt.
The value of convertibles depends on the enterprise value. In contrast to
straight debt, neither the book value nor the simple DCF value of bond cash
flows is a good proxy for the value of convertibles. If the convertible bonds
are actively traded, you could use their market values, but these are suitable
only if your estimated stock price is near the traded stock price. If not, there
are two alternatives:
1. We recommend using an option-based valuation for convertible debt. In
contrast to the treatment of stock options, however, annual reports do
not provide any information on the value of convertible debt. Accurate valuation of convertible bonds with option-based models is not
straightforward, but following methods outlined by John Ingersoll,15
you can apply an adjusted Black-Scholes option-pricing model for a
reasonable approximation.
2.

14

The conversion value approach assumes that all convertible bonds are
immediately exchanged for equity and ignores the time value of the

See R. Brealey and S. Myers, Principles of Corporate Finance, 7th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill,
2002), ch. 23. If you are doing a discounted-cash-f low-to-equity valuation, you subtract only the
value of the conversion option from your DCF valuation. The straight-debt component of the
convertible debt has already been included in the equity cash f lows.
15
The convertible bond can be modeled as a call option on the fraction of equity that the bondholders receive after conversion, with the face value of the bond as exercise price. See J. Ingersoll, “A Contingent Claims Valuation of Convertible Securities,” Journal of Financial Economics, 4
(1977): 289–322.

356

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS

conversion option. It leads to reasonable results when the conversion
option is deep in the money, meaning the bond is more valuable
when converted into equity than held for future coupon and principal payments.
We illustrate both methods in Exhibit 11.5. This exhibit presents an example similar to the one used for the valuation of stock options. In this case,
the company has no options outstanding but instead 10 million convertible
bonds with a face value of $100. The coupon is 2 percent per year, and the
bonds have five years to maturity. The cost of debt is 6.5 percent. The conversion ratio for the bonds is 0.8, meaning 10 bonds can be converted into 8
common shares of equity.
Using a simple convertible-bond valuation model, we estimate a value of
$108.2 per bond. This value consists of the present value of coupons and principal repayment of $81.3 plus a conversion option value of $26.9. Deducting
the value of all convertible bonds and straight debt from the enterprise value,
we arrive at an equity value of $8,918 million and a value per share of $99.1.
Under the conversion value approach, we convert all bonds into equity
and simply divide the undiluted equity value by a total of 90 + 0.8 × 10 = 98
shares. In contrast to the exercise of stock options, there is no cash inflow

Exhibit 11.5 Convertible Debt Example

Company data
Enterprise value ($ million)
Debt value ($ million)
Convertibles face value ($ million)
Nondiluted equity value ($ million)
Number of shares nondiluted
Value per share nondiluted

11,000
(1,000)
(1,000)
9,000
90.0
100.0

Convertible bond
Number of bonds
Face value
Coupon rate (percent)
Years to maturity
Conversion ratio
Value per bond
Bond component
Conversion option
Total

81.3
26.9
108.2

Stock volatility (annualized percent)
Risk free rate (percent)
Cost of debt (percent)

35.0
5.5
6.5

10
100.0
2.0
5
0.8

Enterprise value ($ million)
Debt value ($ million)
Convertibles value ($ million)
Equity value ($ million)

Convertible
valuation
method
11,000
(1,000)
(1,082)
8,918

Conversion
value
method
11,000
(1,000)
–
10,000

Number of shares nondiluted
Number of new shares
Number of shares diluted

90.0
–
90.0

90.0
8.0
98.0

Value per share

99.1

102.0

VALUATION UNDER MULTIPLE SCENARIOS

357

for the company. Instead, we exclude the value of the convertible bonds
from the nonequity claims. This leads to an estimated value per share of
$102, which overestimates the true value.

Minority interests When a company controls a subsidiary without full
ownership, the subsidiary’s financial statements still must be fully consolidated in the group accounts. Without any further adjustment, the full value
of the subsidiary would be improperly included in the parent company valuation. Therefore, you need to deduct the value of the third-party minority
stake in the subsidiary as a nonequity financial claim.
Because minority stakes are to a certain extent the mirror image of nonconsolidated subsidiaries, the recommended valuation for minority interest
is similar to that of nonconsolidated subsidiaries; see the corresponding
section for more details. If the minority stake is publicly listed, as in the
case of minority carve-outs (see Chapter 16), use the proportional market
value owned by outsiders to deduct from enterprise value. Alternatively,
you can perform a separate valuation using a DCF approach, multiples, or a
tracking portfolio, depending on the amount of information available. Remember, however, that minority interest is a claim on a subsidiary, not the
entire company. Thus, any valuation should be directly related to the subsidiary and not the company as a whole.
Calculating Value per Share
The final step in a valuation is to calculate the value per share. Assuming
that you have used an option-based-valuation approach for all options and
convertible securities, you should divide the total equity value by the number of undiluted shares outstanding. Use the undiluted number of shares because the values of convertible debt and stock options have already been
deducted from the enterprise value as nonequity claims.
The number of shares outstanding is the gross number of shares issued,
less the number of shares held in treasury. Most U.S. and European companies report the number of shares issued and those held in treasury under
shareholders’ equity. However, some companies show treasury shares as an
investment asset, which they are not from an economic perspective. Treat
them, instead, as a reduction in the number of shares outstanding.
If you use the conversion and exercise value method to account for convertible debt and stock options, you generate a different value for equity
and should divide by the diluted number of shares.

VALUATION UNDER MULTIPLE SCENARIOS
The purpose of valuing a company is often to guide a management
decision related to acquisition, divestiture, or adoption of internal strategic

358

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS

initiatives. Since most of these decisions involve uncertainty and risk,
consider making financial projections under multiple scenarios. The scenarios should reflect different assumptions regarding future macroeconomic, industry, or business developments, as well as the corresponding
strategic response by the company. Collectively, the scenarios should capture the future states of the world that would have the most impact on future value creation and a reasonable chance of occurrence.
Assess how likely it is that the key assumptions underlying each scenario will change, and assign each scenario a probability of occurrence.
When analyzing the scenarios, critically review your assumptions on the
following variables:
• Broad economic conditions: How critical are these forecasts to the results? Some industries are more dependent on basic economic conditions than others. Home building, for example, is highly correlated
with the overall health of the economy. Branded food processing, in
contrast, is less affected by broad economic trends.
• Competitive structure of the industry: A scenario that assumes substantial increases in market share is less likely in a highly competitive
and concentrated market than in an industry with fragmented and
inefficient competition.
• Internal capabilities of the company that are necessary to achieve the
business results predicted in the scenario: Can the company develop
its products on time and manufacture them within the expected
range of costs?
• Financing capabilities of the company (which are often implicit in the
valuation): If debt or excess marketable securities are excessive relative to the company’s targets, how will the company resolve the imbalance? Should the company raise equity if too much debt is
projected? Should the company be willing to raise equity at its current market price?
Complete the alternative scenarios suggested by the preceding analyses.
The process of examining initial results may well uncover unanticipated
questions that are best resolved by creating additional scenarios. In this
way, the valuation process is inherently circular. Performing a valuation
often provides insights that lead to additional scenarios and analyses. Scenarios not only help you deal with the uncertainty in your financial projections, they also enable you to value nonoperating assets and nonequity
claims more consistently, as we discussed in the beginning of this chapter.
In Exhibit 11.6, we provide a simplified example of a scenario approach
to DCF valuation. The company being valued faces great uncertainty
because of a new product launch for which it has spent considerable R&D.

359

33%
Probability

67%
Probability

Note: WACC: 7.5%, Tax rate: 35%, Debt at face value: $3,500.
1After-tax
operating margin.

Probability weighted
equity value:
1,766

$, percent

Scenario #2
Value of operations
Nonoperating assets
Interest-bearing debt
Equity value

Scenario #1
Value of operations
Nonoperating assets
Interest-bearing debt
Equity value

2,165
241
(2,406)
–

5,522
614
(3,500)
2,635

Exhibit 11.6 Example of a Scenario Approach to DCF Valuation

0.93
128

3.0
5.0
1.03
5.2

Discount factor
PV(FCF)

Growth (percent)
5.0
Operating margin1 (percent) 7.5
Capital turns
1.00
ROIC (percent)
7.5

92
(59)
33

155
–
155
0.93
144

NOPLAT
Net investment
Free cash flow (FCF)
Discount factor
PV(FCF)

0.87
28

3,059
92
3,059

(1.0)
3.0
1.00
3.0

0.87
278

412
(91)
321

3,434
412
3,271

2006
8.0
12.0
1.05
12.6

3,000 3,090
225
155
3,000 3,000

Revenues
NOPLAT
Invested capital

318
(180)
138

3,000 3,180
225
318
3,000 3,180

2005
6.0
10.0
1.00
10.0

NOPLAT
Net investment
Free cash flow (FCF)

Revenues
NOPLAT
Invested capital

2004
Growth (percent)
5.0
1
Operating margin (percent) 7.5
Capital turns
1.00
ROIC (percent)
7.5

Financial projections

0.80
(2)

61
(63)
(3)

3,029
61
3,122

(1.0)
2.0
0.97
1.9

0.80
195

374
(132)
242

3,743
374
3,403

2007
9.0
10.0
1.10
11.0

0.75
34

92
(47)
45

3,074
92
3,169

1.5
3.0
0.97
2.9

0.75
16

397
(376)
21

3,968
397
3,779

2008
6.0
10.0
1.05
10.5

0.70
54

125
(48)
77

3,120
125
3,217

1.5
4.0
0.97
3.9

0.70
20

417
(387)
29

4,167
417
4,167

2009
5.0
10.0
1.00
10.0

10.0

CV
3.5

7.5

1.5

0.65 0.65
102 1,805

206
(48)
158 2,786

3,167
206
3,265

1.5
6.5
0.97
6.3

0.65 0.65
185 4,700

431
(146)
285 7,253

4,312
431
4,312

2010
3.5
10.0
1.00
10.0

360

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS

If the product succeeds, revenue growth will nearly double over the next
few years. Returns on capital will peak at above 12 percent and remain at
10 percent in perpetuity. If the product launch fails, however, growth
will continue to erode as the company’s current products become obsolete.
Operating margins and returns on capital will decline to levels below the
cost of capital. The company only earns its cost of capital in the long term
beyond 2010.
The two scenarios in Exhibit 11.6 reflect this double-or-quit future.
Under the favorable scenario, the DCF value of operations equals $5,522.
The nonoperating assets consist primarily of nonconsolidated subsidiaries,
and given their own reliance on the product launch, they are valued at the
implied NOPLAT multiple for the parent company, $614. We next deduct the
face value of the debt outstanding at $3,500, as the bond was issued at par
and interest rates have not changed significantly since the debt was issued.
The resulting equity value is $2,635 million.
Under the unfavorable scenario, the product launch fails and the DCF
value of operations is only $2,165. In this scenario, the value of the subsidiaries is much lower ($241), as their business outlook has deteriorated due
to the failure of the new product. The value of the debt is no longer $3,500 in
this scenario. Instead, the debt holders would end up with $2,406 by seizing
the enterprise. Obviously, the common equity would have no value.
Given the approximately two-thirds probability of success for the product, the probability-weighted equity value across both scenarios amounts to
$1,766. Note that the probability-weighted value of the debt would be
$3,139—below its face value.
When using the scenario approach, make sure to generate a complete
valuation buildup from value of operations to equity value. For example,
using a scenario approach solely for the value of operations and subsidiaries
and then deducting debt at its face value would seriously underestimate the
equity value. In this case, the equity value would be $361 too low ($3,500
face value minus $3,139 probability-weighted value of debt).16 A similar argument holds for nonoperating assets.
By creating scenarios, you can also better understand the company’s
key priorities. In our example, it appears that searching for ways to improve
the financial performance in the downside scenario by, for example, reducing costs or cutting capital expenditures is unlikely to affect shareholder
value, unless the changes can generate at least $1,100 in present value.
Given the current operating profit of $225, this seems unlikely. In contrast,
16
This also explains why using the market price of bonds or debt in your valuation can lead to
errors if the bonds trade at a significant discount to their face value due to default risk (see this
chapter’s discussion on the treat ment of debt as a nonequity claim). Deducting the market price
of such bonds from the probability-weighted value of operations would be correct only if your
assumptions on default scenarios and probabilities precisely ref lect those of bond investors in
the capital market.

VERIFYING VALUATION RESULTS

361

increasing the odds of a successful launch has a much greater impact on
shareholder value. Increasing the success probability from two-thirds to
three-fourths would boost shareholder value by 12 percent.

VERIFYING VALUATION RESULTS
After estimating the equity value, you should perform several checks to test
the logic of your results, minimize the possibility of errors, and ensure that
you have a good understanding of the forces driving the valuation.

Consistency Check
The first series of checks concerns the logic of your model and valuation:
Are the outcomes consistent with your assumptions?
Ensure that all checks and balances in your model are in place. Your model
should reflect the following fundamental equilibrium relations:
• For the unadjusted financial statements, does the balance sheet balance in every year? Does the net income flow correctly into dividends paid and retained earnings? Are the sources of cash equal to
the uses of cash?
• For the rearranged financial statements, does the sum of invested
capital plus nonoperating assets balance with the financing sources?
Is NOPLAT identical when calculated top down from sales and bottom up from net income? Does net income correctly link to dividends
and retained earnings in adjusted equity? Does the change in excess
cash and debt line up with the cash flow statement?
If these relations do not hold, there is a logical error in the model.
The next step is to check that your valuation results correctly reflect
value driver economics. If the projected returns on invested capital are above
the WACC, the value of operations should be above the book value of invested capital. If, in addition, growth is high, value of operations should be
considerably above book value. If not, a computational error has probably
been made. Compare your valuation results with a back-of-the-envelope
value estimate based on the key value driver formula, taking long-term average growth and return on capital as key inputs.
Finally, make sure that patterns of key financial and operating ratios are
consistent with economic logic:
• Are the patterns intended? For example, does invested capital
turnover increase over time for sound economic reasons or simply

362

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS

because you modeled future capital expenditures as a fixed percentage of revenues? Are future cash tax rates changing dramatically because you forecasted deferred tax assets as a percentage of revenues
or operating profit?
• Are the patterns reasonable? Avoid large step-changes in key assumptions from one year to the next because these will distort key ratios and could lead to false interpretations. For example, a strong
single-year improvement in capital efficiency could make capital expenditures in that year negative, leading to an unrealistically high
cash flow.
• Is a steady state reached for the company’s economics by the end of
the explicit forecasting period, that is, when you apply a continuingvalue formula? A company achieves a steady state only when its free
cash flows are growing at a constant rate. If this is not the case, extend the explicit forecast period while keeping the key performance
ratios constant.

Sensitivity Analysis
The second step is to check whether your model’s results are robust under
alternative assumptions. Start with the key value drivers such as growth and
return on invested capital, which you can further break down into operating margins and capital turnover. If you change the projected growth and
returns, does the valuation change in the way it should? For example, if the
return on invested capital is near the WACC, is value fairly insensitive to
changes in growth, as it should be? If you increase capital turnover assumptions, do ROIC and value rise?
Next, dive deeper into the model’s logic and check how changes in sectorspecific operating value drivers affect the final valuation. For example, if you
increase customer churn rates for a telecommunications company, does
company value decrease? Can you explain with back-of-the-envelope estimates why the change is so large (or so small)?

Plausibility Analysis
Once you believe the model’s logic is correct, you should test whether the
final results are plausible.
If the company is listed, compare your results with the market value. If
your estimate is far from the market value, do not jump to the conclusion
that the market is wrong. Your default assumption should be that the
market is right, unless you have specific indications that not all relevant

HEINEKEN CASE

363

information has been incorporated in the share price, for example due to
low free float or low liquidity of the stock.
Perform a sound multiples analysis. Calculate the implied forwardlooking valuation multiples of the operating value over, for example,
EBITA, and compare these with equivalently defined multiples of traded
peer-group companies. We explain in Chapter 12 how to do a proper multiples analysis. Make sure you can explain any significant differences with
peer-group companies in terms of the companies’ value drivers and underlying business characteristics or strategy.

The Art of Valuation
Valuation can be highly sensitive to small changes in assumptions about the
future. Take a look at the sensitivity of a typical company with a forwardlooking P/E ratio of 15 to 16. Increasing the cost of capital for this company
by 0.5 percentage points will decrease the value by approximately 10 percent. Changing the growth rate for the next 15 years by 1 percentage point
annually will change the value by about 6 percent. For high-growth companies, the sensitivity is even greater. The sensitivity is highest when interest rates are low, as they have been since the late 1990s.
In light of this sensitivity, it should be no surprise that the market value
of a company fluctuates over time. Historical volatilities for a typical stock
over the past several years have been around 25 percent per annum. Taking
this as an estimate for future volatility, the market value of a typical company could well fluctuate around its expected value by 15 percent over the
next month.17
We typically aim for a valuation range of plus or minus 15 percent,
which is similar to the range used by many investment bankers. Even valuation professionals cannot always generate exact estimates. In other words,
keep your aspirations for precision in check.

HEINEKEN CASE
In this chapter ’s case, we complete and analyze the Heineken valuation. First, we calculate the equity value of Heineken for the business-as-usual scenario. We then value

17
Based on a 95 percent confidence interval for the end-of-month price of a stock with an expected return of 9 percent per year.

364

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS

the other two scenarios we developed for the case in Chapter 8. Finally, we estimate a
probability-weighted value.

VALUE IN THE BUSINESS-AS-USUAL SCENARIO
Exhibits 11.7 and 11.8 show the calculation of the value of Heineken’s operations,
using the DCF and economic profit approaches, respectively. Under both methods,
the value of Heineken’s operations is €16.855 billion.
The value of operations includes a midyear adjustment equal to one-half of a
year ’s value discounted at Heineken’s WACC. This is to adjust for the fact that we conservatively discounted the free cash flows and economic profits as if they were entirely
realized at the end of each year, when, in fact, cash flows occur (cycles notwithstanding) evenly throughout the year. The six-month factor assumes that cash flows will
come in on average in the middle of the year.
Under the business-as-usual scenario, Heineken’s equity value is €13.466 billion,
or €34.35 per share, as shown in Exhibit 11.9 on page 366. To calculate the market
equity value, we added the market value of nonoperating assets such as excess cash,
financial fixed assets, and nonconsolidated participating interests to the value of operations; this sum is the enterprise value. We then subtract debt, retirement liabilities,
minority interest, and the restructuring provision to obtain the equity value.

Exhibit 11.7 Heineken: DCF Valuation
€ million
Free cash
flow
(107)
181
320
477
648
975
1,009
1,039
1,071
1,103
1,136
1,170
1,205
1,241
1,278
29,173

2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Continuing value
Operating value
Mid-year adjustment factor
Operating value
(discounted to current month)

Discount
factor
0.9302
0.8653
0.8050
0.7488
0.6966
0.6480
0.6028
0.5607
0.5216
0.4852
0.4513
0.4199
0.3906
0.3633
0.3380
0.3380

Present value
of FCF
(100)
156
258
357
452
632
608
583
558
535
513
491
471
451
432
9,860
16,257
1.04
16,855

VALUE IN THE BUSINESS-AS-USUAL SCENARIO

365

Exhibit 11.8 Heineken: Economic Profit Valuation
€ million
Economic profit
before goodwill
2004
512
2005
540
2006
570
2007
597
2008
618
2009
619
2010
637
2011
656
2012
676
2013
696
2014
717
2015
739
2016
761
2017
784
2018
807
Continuing value
18,387
Present value of economic profit
Invested capital excluding goodwill
(beginning of forecast)
Less: present value of investments
in goodwill
Value of operations
Mid-year adjustment factor
Operating value
(discounted to current month)

Discount
factor
0.9302
0.8653
0.8050
0.7488
0.6966
0.6480
0.6028
0.5607
0.5216
0.4852
0.4513
0.4199
0.3906
0.3633
0.3380
0.3380

Present value of
economic profit
476
467
459
447
431
401
384
368
353
338
324
310
297
285
273
6,214
11,826
5,670
(1,239)
16,257
1.04
16,855

Heineken’s enterprise value includes three nonoperating assets:
1. Financial fixed assets of €671 million are primarily receivables from customers.
We valued these loans at book value.
2. Nonconsolidated participating interests are less than 50 percent investments
in other companies. We valued these at a multiple of income from these investments, similar to the multiples for all brewers. Heineken’s share of income
from these companies was €30 million in 2003 (excluding a one-time gain
from the sale of investments of €71 million), which we multiplied by a typical brewer ’s multiple of 16 to estimate the value of Heineken’s interest at
€480 million.
3. Heineken’s excess cash of €1.231 billion is valued at book value.
By adding the nonoperating assets to the value of operations, we determine an enterprise value of €19.237 billion. The value of Heineken’s debt, minority interest, and
retirement liabilities were estimated in Chapter 10 when we estimated Heineken’s

366

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS

Exhibit 11.9 Heineken: Value of Equity
€ million
Value of operations

16,855

Value of financial fixed assets
Value of nonconsolidated
participating interests
Excess cash
Enterprise value

671
480
1,231
19,237

Value of debt
Value of retirement liabilities
Minority interest
Restructuring provision
Equity value

(3,922)
(526)
(1,030)
(293)
13,466

Number of shares outstanding (million)
Value per share

392
€34.35

cost of capital. We also subtract the restructuring provision, which we expect to be
paid out in the next year. (Since the payout of the restructuring provision will not
flow through free cash flow, it must be subtracted here.) There is no adjustment for
executive stock options because Heineken does not use options to compensate its
managers.
The value of operations for the business-as-usual case is about three times the invested capital (excluding goodwill). This is consistent with Heineken’s projected ROIC
being about twice its cost of capital with modest growth. (With zero growth, the ratio
of DCF value to invested capital will equal the ratio of ROIC to WACC.)

ADDITIONAL SCENARIOS AND PROBABILITY WEIGHTING
We also valued the other two scenarios for Heineken, the operating-improvement
scenario and the aggressive-acquisitions scenario. The results are summarized in Exhibit 11.10.
In the operating-improvement scenario, we projected that Heineken could improve margins and capital turnover near to the peak levels it achieved over the last five
years. This brings Heineken’s ROIC up to 21 percent by the end of the forecast, versus
15 percent in the business-as-usual scenario. Under the operating-improvement scenario, Heineken’s value is €47.00 per share, a 37 percent premium to the business-asusual scenario.
For the aggressive-acquisitions scenario, we forecast growth from acquisitions at
the five-year average historical level of 7.2 percent from 2005 to 2010, then slowing

ADDITIONAL SCENARIOS AND PROBABILITY WEIGHTING

367

Exhibit 11.10 Heineken: Summary of Scenario Values
Scenario
Operating
capital utilization
improvements
6.5

Business
as usual
6.5

High
premium
acquisitions
10.2

13.8

12.6

12.6

Average ROIC (excluding goodwill)
2004–2008 (percent)

20.0

16.0

16.0

Enterprise value (€ million)
Equity value (€ million)

23.9
18.4

19.2
13.5

15.1
9.6

Equity value per share (€ million)
Probability

46.97
25%

34.35
60%

24.55
15%

Average revenue growth,
2004–2008 (percent)
Average EBITA/turnover
2004–2008 (percent)

Expected value per share

€36.03

by 1 percent per year. Under this scenario, competition for acquisitions heats up, and
Heineken is forced to pay high premiums to continue its acquisition growth. We forecast goodwill to increase to 150 percent of revenues from acquisitions during the
acquisition year. Operating performance remains constant. Under the aggressiveacquisitions scenario, Heineken’s value is €24.55 per share, a 29 percent discount relative to the business-as-usual case.
Finally, we weighted the scenario values with probabilities and arrived at an estimated value of €36.03 per share, as shown in Exhibit 11.10. The estimated value is
about 7 percent higher than Heineken’s market value of €33.65 per share as of February 2004. We assigned a higher probability to the upside scenario because we
believe that the recent pressures on margins will force Heineken management to
focus on operating improvement rather than acquisition growth. That said, the temptation of growth through acquisitions is always lurking and may overcome the focus
on operations.
While the scenario approach estimates a value close to the market value, the real
insight from the scenario approach is the spread of values. Even in the case of a profitable but modestly growing company like Heineken, the spread of values across the
scenarios is plus or minus 30 percent, a substantial opportunity (or risk) for both investors and managers.
Finally, we conducted a sensitivity analysis to complement the scenario analysis.
Exhibit 11.11 on page 368 summarizes the impact on Heineken’s value when we
change the forecasts for revenue growth, margins, capital turnover, and cost of capital.
It is impossible to compare the sensitivities directly, because we don’t know whether
the changes in variables are equally likely or difficult. For example, we don’t know
whether it is more or less difficult to increase capital turnover by 0.1 times or to increase margins by 1 percent.

368

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS

Exhibit 11.11 Heineken: Sensitivity Analysis

Organic revenue growth
Adjusted EBITA margin
Capital turnover
WACC

Base value
2004–2008
(percent)
3.0
12.7
1.6
7.5

Change
1.0 %
1.0 %
0.1 times
(0.5) %

Change in equity value
(€ billions)
(percent)
1.6
11.5
1.8
13.0
0.2
1.1
2.4
17.5

In any case, it is evident that Heineken’s value is highly sensitive to changes in its
cost of capital (a 17 percent change in value for a 0.5 percentage point change in
WACC). Given the uncertainty in estimating WACC, this suggests a range of accuracy
for the valuation. On the operating front, the value is moderately sensitive to both revenue growth and margin, although we suspect that margin increases might be more
achievable and sustainable than accelerating growth in a mature market like beer.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. From a manager’s perspective, what is the purpose of computing
the firm’s enterprise value?
2. Once a manager computes enterprise value, what additional process
steps need to be undertaken to determine the value of its equity position? Compare and contrast these additional steps to those of the
cash-flow-to-equity model.
3. Identify the accounting standards specifying the manner and methods to be followed when consolidating a subsidiary’s financial
statements into those of the parent’s financial statements.
4. If a parent company is not able to consolidate a subsidiary’s financial position, explain how the degree of equity ownership impacts
the parent company’s cash flow position.
5. Discuss the relationship of the following nonoperating assets to the
estimation of enterprise value: tax loss carry forwards, discontinued operations, investment in excess real estate, and investments in
underutilized assets.
6. Identify and define the basic categories of nonequity claims. Discuss how each of the following nonequity claims could lead to significant adjustments to a corporate valuation model: preferred
equity and convertible bonds, employee stock options, and unfunded pension liabilities.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

369

7. What should a company consider when estimating the value of employee stock options? Identify the main factors that impact the
value of employee stock options.
8. Define scenario analysis. What benefits are likely to accrue to a
manager when scenario analysis is undertaken in conjunction with
computing enterprise value?
9. Identify the steps that should be taken to verify the results obtained
from estimating enterprise value.
10. How are convertible debt instruments defined in an annual report?
Discuss the impact of the financial statement treatment of convertible debt to the estimation of equity value.

12
Using Multiples
for Valuation
Discounted cash flow analysis is the most accurate and flexible method for
valuing projects, divisions, and companies. Any analysis, however, is only
as accurate as the forecasts it relies on. Errors in estimating the key ingredients of corporate value—ingredients such as a company’s ROIC, growth
rate, and WACC—can lead to mistakes in valuation and, ultimately, to
strategic errors.
A careful multiples analysis—comparing a company’s multiples versus
those of comparable companies—can be useful in making such forecasts
and the DCF valuations they inform more accurate. Properly executed, such
an analysis can help test the plausibility of cash flow forecasts, explain mismatches between a company’s performance and that of its competitors, and
support useful discussions about whether the company is strategically positioned to create more value than other industry players. As you seek to understand why a company’s multiples are higher or lower than those of the
competition, multiples analysis can also generate insights into the key factors creating value in an industry.
Yet multiples are frequently misunderstood and even more often
misapplied. Many financial analysts, for example, calculate an industryaverage price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio and multiply it by a company’s
earnings to establish a “fair” valuation. The use of the industry average,
however, overlooks the fact that companies, even in the same industry,
can have drastically different expected growth rates, returns on invested capital, and capital structures. The P/E ratio can exhibit flaws even
when comparing companies with identical prospects, since it commingles
operating and nonoperating items. By contrast, a carefully designed multiples analysis can provide valuable insights about a company and its
competitors.
371

372

USING MULTIPLES FOR VALUATION

In this chapter, we step through the process of how to create, interpret,
and apply multiples in a valuation setting. We examine how to choose
which multiples are the most effective and how to create multiples that reflect a company’s core operations. Although many claim multiples are an
easy-to-apply valuation method, the converse is true. As you will see, a
well-done multiples analysis requires many of the same adjustments (and
effort) as traditional DCF.

COMPARABLES ANALYSIS: AN EXAMPLE
Each week, investment banking research analysts report the stock market
performance of Home Depot and other American retailers by creating a valuation comps table (comps means “comparable companies”). Exhibit 12.1 is an
abridged version of a typical valuation summary. We use the exhibit to
demonstrate how multiples are created and reported.
Reported in the summary are each company’s week-end closing price
and market capitalization. The table also reports analyst projections for
each company’s earnings per share (EPS). To compare the valuations across
companies, each company’s share price is divided by the projected EPS
to obtain a forward-looking P/E ratio. To derive Home Depot’s forwardlooking P/E ratio of 13.3, divide its week-end closing price of $33 by its projected 2005 EPS of $2.48. Although the calculation is not detailed in the
summary tables, a forward-looking enterprise-value-to-EBITDA ratio is
also reported.
A challenge of using these ratios involves selecting the appropriate
companies for comparison. For the period covered in Exhibit 12.1, Home

Exhibit 12.1 Hardline Retailing Valuation Summary, July 2004

Hardline retailing
Home improvement
Home Depot
Lowe’s
Home furnishing
Bed Bath & Beyond
Linens ’n Things
Consumer electronics
Best Buy
Circuit City
Benchmark index
S&P 500

Stock
price ($)
July 23, 2004

Market
capitalization
$ million

HD
LOW

33.00
48.39

74,250
39,075

2.18
2.86

2.48
3.36

7.1
7.3

13.3
14.4

BBBY
LIN

34.89
25.86

10,697
1,152

1.58
1.86

1.83
2.13

9.9
5.1

19.1
12.1

BBY
CC

47.11
13.58

15,537
2,708

2.88
0.55

3.41
0.61

6.3
4.4

13.8
22.3

SPX

1,086.20

64.74

69.76

Ticker

1
Credit Suisse First Boston (CSFB) analysts’ projections for EPS by calendar year.
2

Earnings per
share (EPS), ($)1
2004 2005

Foward-looking
multiples, 2005
EBITDA2
P/E

EBITDA = earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization; EBITDA and P/E are reported by calendar year.
Source: Hardlines Retailing: Weekly Review, CSFB, New York, July 26, 2004.

15.6

WHAT BESIDES GROWTH DRIVES MULTIPLES?

373

Depot and its primary competitor, Lowe’s, traded at nearly identical multiples. The price-to-earnings ratios for the two companies differed by only
8 percent, and their enterprise-to-EBITDA ratios differed by only 3 percent. This similarity does not hold, however, when we expand the set of
comparables. For the entire hardline retailing group, enterprise multiples
vary from 4.4 to 9.9. Why such a large range? Investors have different expectations for each company’s ability to create value going forward.
Therefore, from a valuation perspective, not every company in the sample
is truly comparable.
Understanding what drives these systematic differences in multiples
is critical to using multiples appropriately. We discuss the drivers of multiples next.

WHAT BESIDES GROWTH DRIVES MULTIPLES?
Many investors and corporate managers swayed by the teachings of Wall
Street pundits believe that multiples are driven by earnings growth. David
and Tom Gardner of The Motley Fool investor web site write, “The P/E generally reflects the market’s expectations for the growth of a given company.”1
Academics further this perception in their own writings. In their core finance
text, Professors Richard Brealey and Stewart Myers write, “The high P/E
shows that investors think that the firm has good growth opportunities, that
its earnings are relatively safe and deserve a low [cost of capital], or both.”2
Growth does indeed drive multiples, but only when combined with
a healthy return on invested capital. To see how both ROIC and growth
drive multiples, we reexamine the key value driver formula, introduced in
Chapter 3:

V=

g 

NOPLAT  1 −


ROIC 
WACC − g

The key value driver is a cash-flow-based formula that has been rearranged
to focus on NOPLAT, ROIC, growth ( g), and the WACC. To build a pretax
enterprise-value multiple, disaggregate NOPLAT into EBITA and the company’s cash tax rate (T):
1

David Gardner and Tom Gardner, “The Fool Ratio: The Growth Rate Examined,” www.fool
.com/School/TheGrowthRate.ht m.
2
Many readers interpret “good growth opportunities” as implying “plentiful growth opportunities.” This is incorrect. Instead, Brealey and Myers write “good growth opportunities” to
imply “value-creating growth opportunities.” This difference is critical. Richard Brealey and
Stewart Myers, Principles of Corporate Finance (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002).

374

USING MULTIPLES FOR VALUATION

V=

g 

EBITA (1 − T )  1 −


ROIC 
WACC − g

and divide both sides by EBITA:


V
=
EBITA



g

(1 − T )  1 − ROIC 
WACC − g

The resulting equation is an algebraic representation of a commonly used
multiple, enterprise value to EBITA. The multiple is similar to the P/E ratio
but focuses on enterprise value, rather than equity. (We return to this fundamental difference in the next section.) From the equation, four factors
drive the enterprise-value-to-EBITA multiple: the company’s growth rate,
return on invested capital, the cash tax rate, and the cost of capital. In most
situations, the average cash tax rate and cost of capital will be similar across
companies within the industry ( because they face the same tax policies and
have similar operating risks). This similarity does not hold for ROIC and
growth, which can vary dramatically across companies, even within an industry. Thus, the same industry can include companies with drastically different multiples for perfectly valid reasons.
To demonstrate how different values of ROIC and growth will generate
different multiples, Exhibit 12.2 uses the key value driver formula to create
a set of hypothetical multiples for a company whose cash tax rate equals 30

Exhibit 12.2 How ROIC and Growth Drive Multiples
Enterprise value to EBITA1

1

Long-term
growth rate
(percent)

Return on invested capital (percent)
6

9

15

20

25

4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0

4.7
3.9
2.9
1.7
n/a

7.8
7.8
7.8
7.8
7.8

10.3
10.9
11.7
12.7
14.0

11.2
12.1
13.1
14.5
16.3

11.8
12.8
14.0
15.6
17.7

Based on the key value driver formula, assuming a 30 percent cash tax rate and a 9 percent cost of capital.

BEST PRACTICES FOR USING MULTIPLES

375

percent and whose cost of capital equals 9 percent, rates similar to those for
Home Depot.3 In the exhibit, high multiples result from high returns on invested capital and from high growth rates.
As Exhibit 12.2 demonstrates, the enterprise-value-to-EBITA multiple
increases with growth only if the company’s ROIC is greater than the cost
of capital. When ROIC equals the WACC, the enterprise-value-to-EBITA
multiple is constant and equals (1 − T)/WACC. In this example, the WACC
is 9 percent, and expected cash taxes are 30 percent, so the enterprise-value
multiple is estimated at 7.8 times, regardless of expected growth. (Home
Depot’s actual enterprise value multiple of 2005 EBITA equals 8.7.) The exhibit also demonstrates that different combinations can lead to the same
results. If the company grows at 6 percent and generates a 15 percent return on invested capital, it will have the same multiple (according to the
formula) as if the company grew at only 5 percent but generated returns of
25 percent.

BEST PRACTICES FOR USING MULTIPLES
A thoughtful multiples analysis can provide valuable insights about a company and its competitors. Conversely, a poor analysis can result in confusion.
In Exhibit 12.3 on page 376, we create a set of multiples analyses for Home
Depot using various methodologies. For each comparison, we compute
whether Home Depot is trading at a premium (i.e., has a higher multiple) to
other companies or trading at a discount. In the first comparison, a trailing
P/E ratio (based on earnings from the last fiscal year) is computed to benchmark Home Depot against all hardline retailers. Based on this comparison,
the company trades at a 19 percent discount to its “peers.” This discount is
misleading, however, because the backward-looking price-to-earnings ratio
measures past performance, not future performance, which is the basis for
value. The ratio also commingles operating, nonoperating, and financial
characteristics. Therefore, we make a series of adjustments to focus on future
operating performance.
Because the listed retailers are extremely diverse, with varying
prospects for ROIC and growth, we first reduce the peer group to Home
Depot’s closest competitor, Lowe’s. (We would prefer to include other
home improvement competitors, such as Menards, but it and other largescale home improvement retailers are not publicly traded.) After this adjustment, the trailing P/E ratio discount drops to 17 percent. We next
replace historical earnings with estimates for next year’s earnings, which
further lowers the discount to 8 percent.
3
The key value driver formula is a perpetuity-based formula that assumes ROIC and growth
never change. Since this assumption is overly restrictive for most companies, we use the formula to demonstrate levers, rather than predict accurate enterprise-value multiples.

376

USING MULTIPLES FOR VALUATION

Exhibit 12.3 Home Depot: Discount Relative to Peers
Discount (percent)
Using P/E based on
historical earnings versus
all hardline retailers

19

Using P/E based on historical
earnings versus Lowe’s

17

Using P/E based on forecasted
earnings versus Lowe’s
Using enterprise-value
multiple based on forecasted
EBITA versus Lowe’s
Using adjusted enterprise-value
multiple based on forecasted
EBITA versus Lowe’s1

8

Home Depot
multiple

Peer group
multiple

17.3

21.3

17.3

20.8

13.3

14.4

8.7

9.3

8.9

9.4

7

5

1

Adjusted for operating leases and nonoperating items.

To improve the comparison further, we switch to an enterprise-value
multiple. This avoids any bias caused by capital structure and nonoperating
gains and losses. Using an enterprise-value-to-EBITA multiple causes the
difference to drop to 7 percent. Finally, we strip out excess cash and adjust
for capitalized operating leases (the same two adjustments we made when
calculating Home Depot’s enterprise DCF value) from the enterprise-value
multiple. Based on the adjusted enterprise-value multiple, Home Depot and
Lowe’s trade within 5 percent of one another.
As the Home Depot example demonstrates, using the wrong multiple
can lead to errors in assessment and potentially valuation. When we used
trailing P/E to compare Home Depot with the hardline retailers, the
company seemed to be undervalued by 20 percent. But with an adjusted
enterprise-value multiple, the valuation differences are small.
To apply multiples properly, use the following four best practices:
1. Choose comparables with similar prospects for ROIC and growth.
2. Use multiples based on forward-looking estimates.
3. Use enterprise-value multiples based on EBITA to mitigate problems
with capital structure and one-time gains and losses.
4. Adjust the enterprise-value multiple for nonoperating items, such as excess cash, operating leases, employee stock options, and pension expenses (the same items for which we adjusted ROIC and free cash flow).

Choose Comparables with Similar Prospects
To analyze a company using comparables, you must first create a peer
group. Most analysts start by examining the company’s industry. But how

BEST PRACTICES FOR USING MULTIPLES

377

do you define an industry? Sometimes, a company lists its competitors in
its annual report. If the company doesn’t disclose its competition, you can
use an industry classification system such as Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes.4 Home Depot’s SIC code, however, contains more than
20 companies, many of which are not directly comparable because they
sell very different products or rely on different business models. A
slightly better but proprietary system is the Global Industry Classifications Standard (GICS) system, recently developed by Standard & Poor’s
and Morgan Stanley. A recent study found GICS classifications do a significantly better job of explaining cross-sectional variations in valuation
multiples, forecasted and realized growth rates, R&D expenditures, and
key financial ratios.5
Once you have collected a list and properly measured the multiples, the
digging begins. You must answer a series of questions: Why are the multiples different across the peer group? Do certain companies in the group
have superior products, better access to customers, recurring revenues, or
economies of scale? If these strategic advantages translate to superior ROIC
and growth rates, better-positioned companies should trade at higher multiples. You must understand what products they sell, how they generate revenue and profits, and how they grow. Only then will a company’s multiple
appear in the appropriate context with other companies.
In general, we recommend analyzing a set of multiples to better understand how a company is valued relative to its peers. In limited situations,
you may need a representative multiple for use in valuation. For example,
valuing minority interest from an outside perspective is difficult using traditional DCF because the required information to reconstruct cash flows is
unavailable. (See Chapter 11 for more on minority interest.) Although missing information can be estimated, an alternative is to apply a representative
earnings-based multiple to minority interest.
To develop a representative multiple, first limit the set to companies
with similar characteristics, as we described above. Next, compute the median or harmonic mean of the sample.6 To calculate the harmonic mean,
compute the peer group’s average EBITA-to-enterprise-value ratio (the
reciprocal of the traditional ratio), and then take the reciprocal of the
average. Do not use the average multiple outright, which can lead to major

4
Beginning in 1997, SIC codes were replaced by a major revision called the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). The NAICS six-digit code not only provides for newer industries, but also reorganizes the categories on a production/process-oriented basis. The
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), however, still lists companies by SIC code.
5
S. Bhojraj, C. M. C. Lee, and D. Oler, “ What ’s My Line? A Comparison of Industry Classification Schemes for Capital Market Research” (working paper, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University, May
2003), http://ssrn.com/abstract=356840.
6
Malcolm Baker and Richard Ruback use simulation to demonstrate that the harmonic mean
leads to superior results. M. Baker and R. S. Ruback, “Estimating Industry Multiples” (working
paper, Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School, 1999).

378

USING MULTIPLES FOR VALUATION

distortions. Companies whose earnings are small on a temporary basis
will have extremely large multiples that will inappropriately dominate the
average. The sample median is less sensitive to outliers.
In some industries, the peer group will contain companies with negative earnings. For these companies, the multiples are not meaningful. In
most situations, these companies can be excluded from the peer set because
they are not comparable (a company with poor prospects should not be
used to value a company with good prospects). If you are truly unclear
about your company’s future prospects, then including only companies
with positive earnings will bias the industry multiple. In this case, switch
to a multiple whose denominator is positive. Companies with negative
earnings often have positive EBITDA and always have positive sales. Use
this option sparingly, however. Moving up the income statement imposes
further restrictions on the comparability of margins, returns on capital,
and so on.
The retailers examined in Exhibit 12.1 are “pure play” businesses,
meaning the vast majority of their revenues and profits come from one business type. When valuing or analyzing a company with multiple business
units, each with different prospects for ROIC and growth, you should use a
separate peer group for each business unit. (For more on valuing multibusiness companies, see Chapter 19.)

Use Forward-Looking Multiples
When building a multiple, the denominator should use a forecast of profits,
rather than historical profits. Unlike backward-looking multiples, forwardlooking multiples are consistent with the principles of valuation—in particular, that a company’s value equals the present value of future cash flow,
not sunk costs.
Empirical evidence shows that forward-looking multiples are indeed
more accurate predictors of value. One empirical study examined the characteristics and performance of historical multiples versus forward industry
multiples for a large sample of companies trading on the New York Stock
Exchange (NYSE), the American Stock Exchange (AMEX), and NASDAQ.7
When companies were measured versus their industry, their historical
earnings-to-price (E/P) ratios had 1.6 times the standard deviation of oneyear forward E/P ratios (6.0 percent versus 3.7 percent). In addition, the
study found forward-looking multiples led to greater pricing accuracy.8
The median pricing error equaled 23 percent for historical multiples and 18
7
J. Liu, D. Nissim, and J. Thomas, “Equity Valuation Using Multiples,” Journal of Accounting Research, 40 (2002): 135 –172.
8
To forecast a company’s price, the authors multiplied the company’s earnings by the industry
median multiple. Pricing error equals the difference between forecasted price and actual price,
divided by actual price.

BEST PRACTICES FOR USING MULTIPLES

379

percent for one-year forecasted earnings. Two-year forecasts worked even
better, lowering the median pricing error to 16 percent.
Other research, which used multiples to predict the price of 142 initial
public offerings, also found multiples based on forecasted earnings outperformed those based on historical earnings.9 As the analysis moved from
multiples based on historical earnings to multiples based on one- and twoyear forecasts, the average pricing error fell from 55.0 percent to 43.7 percent to 28.5 percent, respectively, and the percentage of firms valued within
15 percent of their actual trading multiple increased from 15.4 percent to
18.9 percent to 36.4 percent.
Based on the principles of valuation and on empirical evidence, we recommend building multiples based on forecasted profits, not on historical
profits.10 If you must use historical data, make sure to use the most recent
data possible and eliminate any one-time events.

Use Enterprise-Value Multiples
Although widely used, the price-earnings multiple has two major flaws.
First, the price-earnings ratio is systematically affected by capital structure.
Second, unlike EBITA, net income is calculated after nonoperating gains
and losses. Thus, a nonoperating loss, such as a noncash write-off, can significantly lower earnings (without a comparable effect on value), causing
the P/E ratio to be artificially high. Given the shortcomings of P/E ratios,
we recommend using forward-looking enterprise-value multiples—debt
plus equity to forecasted EBITA.11 The following paragraphs examine the effects of capital structure and one-time items in detail.
Throughout this book, we have focused on the drivers of operating performance—ROIC, growth, and free cash flow—because the traditional ratios, such as return on assets and return on equity, commingle the effects of
operations and capital structure. The same principles hold true with multiples. Price-earnings multiples commingle expectations about operating performance, capital structure, and nonoperating items.
To effectively analyze valuation multiples across an industry, we need a
multiple that is independent of capital structure. The price-to-earnings
ratio does not meet this criterion. In Appendix E, we derive the explicit
9

M. Kim and J. R. Ritter, “Valuing IPOs,” Journal of Financial Economics, 53(3) (1999): 409– 437.
A cautionary note about using forward multiples: Some analysts forecast future earnings
by assuming an industry multiple and backing out the required earnings based on the current price. In this case, any multiples you calculate will merely ref lect the analyst ’s assumptions about the appropriate forward multiple, and dispersion (even when warranted) will be
nonexistent.
11
If the company has nonoperating assets, such as excess cash or nonconsolidated subsidiaries,
the enterprise-value ratio must be adjusted. Otherwise, the numerator (which includes the
value from nonoperating assets) and the denominator (which excludes their income) will be inconsistent. We discuss adjust ments in the next section.
10

380

USING MULTIPLES FOR VALUATION

Exhibit 12.4 The Relation between Leverage and P/E
Price to earnings multiple1
Price to earnings for
an all-equity company
Debt to
value

10

15

20

10%
20%
30%
40%
50%

9.5
8.9
8.2
7.5
6.7

14.6
14.1
13.5
12.9
12.0

20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0

25

40

25.7 45.0
26.7 53.3
28.0 70.0
30.0 120.0
33.3 n/m

1

Assumes a cost of debt equal to 5% and no taxes.

relation between a company’s actual P/E ratio and its unlevered P/E ratio
(PEu)—the P/E ratio as if the company were entirely financed with equity.
Assuming no taxes, a company’s P/E ratio can be expressed as follows:
K − PE u
P
1
=K+
such that K =
E
k
D
  k PE − 1
d
  ( d )( u )
V

where

kd = cost of debt
D/V = the ratio of debt to value

As the formula demonstrates, when the unlevered P/E equals the reciprocal
of the cost of debt, the numerator of the fraction equals zero, and leverage
has no effect on the P/E ratio. For companies with large unlevered P/Es
(i.e., companies with significant opportunities for future value creation),
P/E systematically increases with leverage. Conversely, companies with
small unlevered P/Es would exhibit a drop in P/E as leverage rises.
Based on this formula for the P/E ratio, Exhibit 12.4 compares the relation between leverage and P/E. To build the table, we assume a cost of debt
equal to 5 percent and no taxes. For unlevered P/E ratios greater than 20, the
P/E ratio increases with leverage. This occurs because, for high-P/E companies, the drop in equity (which occurs when debt is used to repurchase
shares) is less than the drop in earnings (because of new interest). For companies with significantly high unlevered P/Es, such as 40, increased leverage
will cause the levered P/E to explode. In this example, a company with an
unlevered P/E of 40 and debt to value of 50 percent is not meaningful, because interest causes earnings to be negative.
An alternative to the P/E ratio is enterprise value to EBITA. In a world
with no taxes and no distress costs, the enterprise-value-to-EBITA ratio is un-

BEST PRACTICES FOR USING MULTIPLES

381

affected by leverage. In actuality, even the enterprise-value-to-EBITA ratio
depends somewhat on a company’s capital structure. The reason is that although EBITA is independent of capital structure, enterprise value is higher
for companies with more efficient capital structures. Remember, enterprise
value depends on ROIC, growth, and the weighted average cost of capital.
Thus, improvements in WACC translate to increases in enterprise value.
In theory, we would like to remove the present value of tax shields and
distress costs from enterprise value. This would allow us to create a purely
operating multiple, completely independent of a company’s capital structure. In practice, the complexity of removing these effects outweighs the
potential errors they cause if left in place.
A second problem with the P/E ratio is that earnings include many nonoperating items, such as restructuring charges and write-offs. Since many
nonoperating items are one-time events, multiples based on P/Es can be
misleading. In 2002, AOL-Time Warner wrote off nearly $100 billion in
goodwill and other intangibles. Even though EBITA equaled $6.4 billion,
the company recorded a $98 billion loss. Since earnings were negative, the
company’s 2002 P/E ratio was meaningless.

Adjust Enterprise-Value Multiple for Nonoperating Items
Although EBITA is superior to earnings for calculating multiples, even
enterprise-value multiples must be adjusted for nonoperating items included within enterprise value or reported EBITA. This is similar to the
discussion in Chapter 7, where we demonstrated how financial statements
based on today’s accounting principles commingle operating and nonoperating items. This caused us to reorganize the company’s financial statements, allowing us to compute ROIC and free cash flow, both of which are
independent of capital structure and nonoperating items.
To build a clean set of multiples, we apply the same principles. The
market-based enterprise value must be adjusted for nonoperating items,
such as excess cash and operating leases. Although reported EBITA appears
independent of nonoperating items, it must be adjusted as well. For instance, reported EBITA includes the implicit interest expense from operating leases. Failing to adjust EBITA can generate misleading results. See
Chapter 7 for a detailed description of the reorganization process; here are
the most common adjustments:
• Excess cash and other nonoperating assets: Since EBITA excludes interest
income from excess cash, enterprise value should not include excess
cash either. To calculate an enterprise-value multiple, sum the
market values of debt and equity, subtract excess cash, and divide
the remainder by EBITA. The same holds true for other nonoperating

382

USING MULTIPLES FOR VALUATION

assets, whose income is not part of EBITA. Nonoperating assets must
be evaluated separately.
• Operating leases: Companies with significant operating leases will
have an artificially low enterprise value ( because we are ignoring the
value of lease-based debt) and an artificially low EBITA ( because
rental expense includes interest costs). To calculate an enterprisevalue multiple, add the value of leased assets to the market value of
debt and equity. Add back the implied interest expense to EBITA.
• Employee stock options: For companies that fail to expense stock options,
EBITA will be artificially high. To properly calculate an enterprisevalue multiple, subtract the after-tax value of newly issued employee
option grants from EBITA (as reported in the footnotes). To adjust
enterprise value, add the present value of employee grants outstanding to the sum of debt and equity. Enterprise value should be adjusted for any company with outstanding options, regardless of its
expensing policy.
• Pensions: To adjust enterprise value, add the after-tax present value of
pension liabilities to debt plus equity. To remove the nonoperating
gains and losses related to plan assets, start with EBITA, add the
pension interest expense, and deduct the recognized returns on plan
assets (as reported in the footnotes).
To see the distortions caused by nonoperating assets, consider once again
the multiples analysis presented in Exhibit 12.1. Best Buy trades at a premium
to Circuit City Stores, according to their respective enterprise-value multiples (6.3 versus 4.4), but it trades at a discount based on P/E ratios (13.8 versus 22.3). So which is it, premium or discount? In reality, Circuit City’s P/E
multiple is meaningless. In July 2004, Circuit City’s total equity value was approximately $2.7 billion, but the company held nearly $1 billion in cash. Since
cash generates very little income, the P/E ratio of cash is very high (a 2 percent after-tax return on investment translates to a P/E of 50). Thus, the extremely high P/E of cash will artificially increase the P/E of Circuit City’s
operating business. When we remove cash from equity value ($2,708 million
− $990 million) and divide by earnings less after-tax interest income ($122
million − $8 million), Circuit City’s P/E drops from 22.3 to 15.1.
In Exhibit 12.5, we adjust the enterprise multiples of Home Depot and
Lowe’s for excess cash and operating leases. To adjust enterprise value, we
start with Home Depot’s market value of debt plus equity ($75.6 billion),
add back the value of leased assets ($6.6 billion), and subtract excess cash
($1.6 billion). This leads to an adjusted enterprise value of $80.6 billion.
Next, we adjust 2005 estimated EBITA ($8.7 billion) for implied interest
on operating leases ($340 million). Before adjustments, Home Depot’s
enterprise-value multiple is within 6.6 percent of that for Lowe’s. After adjustments, the difference drops to 5.1 percent.

BEST PRACTICES FOR USING MULTIPLES

383

Exhibit 12.5 Home Depot and Lowe’s: Adjusted to Enterprise
Value Multiples
$ million
Outstanding debt
Market value of equity
Enterprise value

Home Depot
1,365
74,250
75,615

Lowe’s
3,755
39,075
42,830

Capitalized operating leases
Excess cash
Adjusted enterprise value

6,554
(1,609)
80,560

2,762
(1,033)
44,559

2005 EBITA
Implied interest from leases
Adjusted 2005 EBITA

8,691
340
9,031

4,589
154
4,743

Home Depot
8.7
8.9

Lowe’s
9.3
9.4

Raw enterprise value multiple
Adjusted enterprise value multiple

Difference
(6.6%)
(5.1%)

Throughout this chapter, we emphasize enterprise-value multiples
based on EBITA. This approach enables us to tie the enterprise-value multiple directly to the key value driver formula. A common alternative to the
EBITA multiple is the EBITDA multiple.12 Many financial analysts use
EBITDA multiples because depreciation is a noncash expense, reflecting
sunk costs, not future investment.
To see this, consider two companies, each of which owns a machine that
produces identical products. Both machines have the same cash-based operating costs, and each company’s products sell for the same price. If one company paid more for its equipment (for whatever reason—perhaps poor
negotiation), it will have higher depreciation going forward and, thus, lower
EBITA. Valuation, however, is based on discounted cash flow, not discounted profits. And since both companies have identical cash flow, they
should have identical values.13 We would therefore expect the two companies to have identical multiples. Yet, because EBITA differs across the two
companies, their multiples will differ as well.
Since valuation is based on future cash flows, EBITDA might seem superior to EBITA. But this is not always the case. Exhibit 12.6 on page 384 presents
two companies that differ in only one aspect. Company A manufactures its
12

EBITDA stands for earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization.
Since depreciation is tax deductible, a company with higher depreciation will have a smaller
tax burden. Lower taxes lead to higher cash f lows and a higher valuation. Therefore, even companies with identical EBITDAs will have different EBITDA multiples. The distortion, however,
is less pronounced.

13

384

USING MULTIPLES FOR VALUATION

Exhibit 12.6 Comparing EBITA and EBITDA Multiples
$ million
Revenues
Raw materials
Operating costs
EBITDA

Company A
100
(10)
(40)
50

Company B
100
(35)
(40)
25

(30)
20

(5)
20

Multiples
Enterprise value ($ million)

Company A
150.0

Company B
150.0

Enterprise value / EBITDA
Enterprise value / EBITA

3.0
7.5

6.0
7.5

Depreciation
EBITA

Company B
outsources
manufacturing to
another company

products using its own equipment, whereas Company B outsources manufacturing to a supplier. Since Company A owns its equipment, it recognizes
significant depreciation—in this case, $30 million. Company B has less
equipment, so its depreciation is only $5 million. However, Company B’s
supplier will include its own depreciation costs in its price, and Company B
will subsequently pay more for its raw materials. Because of this difference, Company B generates EBITDA of only $25 million, versus $50 million
for Company A. This difference in EBITDA will lead to differing multiples.
Yet, when Company A’s depreciation is accounted for, both companies
trade at 7.5 times EBITA.
When computing the enterprise-value-to-EBITDA multiple in the previous example, we failed to recognize that Company A (the company that
owns its equipment) will have to expend cash to replace aging equipment.
Since capital expenditures are recorded as an investing cash flow they do
not appear on the income statement, causing the discrepancy. Some analysts
overcome this reinvestment problem by adjusting EBITDA for expected investments in working capital and property, plant, and equipment. This adjustment is highly subjective (capital expenditures are lumpy, so smoothing
is required) and can result in a negative denominator, making the multiple
meaningless.

ALTERNATIVE MULTIPLES
Although we have so far focused on enterprise-value multiples based on
EBITA and EBITDA, other multiples can prove helpful in certain situations.

ALTERNATIVE MULTIPLES

385

In the following subsections, we discuss three alternatives: the price-tosales ratio, the price-to-earnings-growth ratio (known as the PEG ratio),
and regression-based analysis using nonfinancial data.

Price-to-Sales Multiples
Generally speaking, price-to-sales multiples are not particularly useful for
explaining company valuations. As shown earlier, an enterprise-value-toEBITA multiple assumes similar growth rates and returns on incremental
capital. An enterprise-value-to-sales multiple imposes an additional important restriction: similar operating margins on the company’s existing business. For most industries, this restriction is overly burdensome.
The multiples chart in Exhibit 12.7 is often analyzed by investment
bankers. In the chart, Home Depot’s stock value is estimated using peer
multiples. Each horizontal set of dots represents a different multiple. The
top row estimates Home Depot’s stock price based on each peer company’s enterprise-value-to-sales ratio, the middle row uses an enterprisevalue-to-EBITA ratio, and the bottom row shows a price-to-earnings ratio.
The vertical line represents Home Depot’s actual stock price at the time of
the analysis and intersects Home Depot’s actual multiples.
In this example, Circuit City trades at 0.1 times forecasted sales; applying that ratio to Home Depot’s forecasted revenues would place Home
Depot’s stock price at $4 per share. At the other extreme, Bed, Bath, & Beyond trades at 1.7 times sales, generating an estimate of $60 for Home
Depot’s stock. Thus, we have narrowed the company’s stock price to somewhere between $4 and $60 per share—a range too wide to provide any useful insight.
Given how imprecise price-to-sales ratios are, limit their use to situations where the company in question or its peers have extremely small or

Exhibit 12.7 Home Depot: Estimated Share Price Using Comparables1
Circuit
City

Linens Best
’n Things Buy

Home Lowe’s
Depot

Bed Bath
& Beyond

Enterprise / Sales
Enterprise / EBITA
Price / Earnings

0.0

15.0

30.0
Estimated share price ($)

1

Share price estimated by applying competitor multiple to Home Depot financials.

45.0

60.0

386

USING MULTIPLES FOR VALUATION

even negative operating profits. Revenue multiples are most common to
venture capital because many start-ups will not turn a profit for years. If
your situation demands a price-to-sales multiple, make sure to follow the
fundamental principles presented in this chapter: Use enterprise value,
not equity value; use forward-looking sales projections; and focus on companies with similar growth, ROICs, and expected operating margins.

PEG Ratios
Whereas a price-to-sales ratio further restricts the enterprise-value-toEBITA multiple by assuming operating margins are common across companies, the price-earnings-growth (PEG) ratio is more flexible than the
enterprise-value-to-EBITA ratio, because it allows expected growth to vary
across companies. If you use a PEG ratio, you can expand a company’s peer
group to include competitors that are in different stages of their life cycle
(from a growth perspective).
Traditionally, PEG ratios are calculated by dividing the P/E ratio by expected growth in earnings per share, but our modified version is based on
the enterprise-value multiple:
Adjusted PEG Ratio = 100 ×

Enterprise-Value Multiple
Expected EBITA Growth Rate

Exhibit 12.8 calculates the adjusted PEG ratios for our sample of retailers. To calculate Home Depot’s adjusted PEG ratio (0.6 times), divide the
company’s forward-looking enterprise-value multiple (7.1 times) by its expected operating profit growth rate (11.8 percent). Based on the adjusted
PEG ratio, Home Depot trades at a significant premium to Lowe’s. Using the

Exhibit 12.8 Adjusted PEG Ratio

Hardline retailing
Home improvement
Home Depot
Lowe’s
Home furnishing
Bed Bath & Beyond
Linens ’n Things
Consumer electronics
Best Buy
Circuit City
Source: CSFB estimates on hardline retailing, July 26, 2004.

2005
enterprise
multiple

Expected
profit
growth

Adjusted
PEG
ratio

7.1
7.3

11.8
17.2

0.60
0.42

9.9
5.1

16.1
15.4

0.61
0.33

6.3
4.4

18.8
7.6

0.34
0.58

ALTERNATIVE MULTIPLES

387

key value driver formula as our guide, this is not surprising. Since the PEG
ratio controls only for growth, companies with higher ROICs should trade at
higher levels. According to analyst estimates, Home Depot’s ROIC is expected to equal 17 percent, whereas the estimate of ROIC for Lowe’s is only
14 percent.
The PEG ratio’s ability to analyze companies with varying growth
rates appears to give it a leg up on the standard enterprise-value multiple.
Yet the PEG ratio has its own drawbacks that can lead to valuation errors.
First, there is no standard time frame for measuring expected growth. You
may find yourself wondering whether to use one-year, two-year, or longterm growth. Exhibit 12.8 used analyst projections for two-year expected
EBITA growth.
Second, PEG ratios assume a linear relation between multiples and
growth, such that no growth implies zero value. Exhibit 12.9 uses the average
PEG ratio to value a hypothetical industry with five companies. Each company has a long-term expected ROIC of 15 percent, has a WACC equal to 9
percent, and pays cash taxes at 30 percent. The five hypothetical companies
differ only in their growth rates (which vary from 2 percent to 6 percent).
Using the key value driver formula, we estimate each company’s enterprisevalue multiple. Note how the dotted line, which plots enterprise value versus

Exhibit 12.9 PEG Ratio Estimation Error
25

20

Enterprise value/EBITA

Values based
on PEG ratio
15
Values
based
on DCF

Company 1
10

5

Valuation
error

0
0.0

2.0

4.0
Long-term growth rate (percent)

6.0

8.0

388

USING MULTIPLES FOR VALUATION

growth, is curved and has a positive intercept (even zero-growth firms have
positive values). Conversely, the PEG ratio is linear and has a zero intercept.
Since PEG is multiplied by growth to approximate firm value, a company
with constant profits would have an implied value of zero. As a result, the
typical application of industry PEG ratios will systematically undervalue
companies with low growth rates.
To avoid undervaluing low-growth companies, some financial analysts
(and most academics) use a regression analysis to determine a representative multiple. The regression is based on the following equation:
EV/EBITAi = a + b (Expected Growthi)

For the six hardline retailers presented in Exhibit 12.8, this regression leads
to an intercept of 3.5 and a slope coefficient of 0.2. Thus, a zero-growth
company should be valued at 3.5 times EBITA, not zero, and a company
expected to grow at 5 percent would be valued at 4.5 times EBITA. This regression analysis, however, does not adjust for the nonlinear relation between growth and value. More advanced regression techniques can be
employed, but unless the sample is large, the regression often fails to provide useful insight.

Multiples Based on Nonfinancial (Operational) Data
In the late 1990s, numerous companies went public with meager sales and
negative profits. For many financial analysts, valuing the young companies was a struggle because of the great uncertainty surrounding potential market size, profitability, and required investments. Financial
multiples that normally provide a benchmark for valuation were rendered
useless because profitability (measured in any form) was often negative.
To overcome this shortcoming, academics and practitioners alike relied
on nonfinancial multiples, which compare enterprise value to one or more
nonoperating financial statistics, such as web site hits, unique visitors, or
number of subscribers. In 2000, Fortune reported market-value-to-customer
multiples for a series of Internet companies.14 Fortune determined Yahoo
was trading at $2,038 per customer, Amazon.com was trading at $1,400 per
customer, and NetZero at $1,140 per customer. The article suggested that
“Placing a value on a Website’s customers may be the best way to judge an
[Internet] stock.”

14

E. Schonfeld, “How Much Are Your Eyeballs Worth?” Fortune (February 21, 2000), pp. 197–200.

ALTERNATIVE MULTIPLES

389

To use a nonfinancial multiple effectively, you must follow the same
guidelines outlined earlier in this chapter. The nonfinancial metric must
be a reasonable predictor of future value creation, and thus somehow
tied to ROIC and growth. In the example cited previously, Yahoo trades
at a higher multiple than Amazon.com because Yahoo’s incremental
costs per user are much smaller, an advantage that translates into higher
profits.
Nonfinancial measures did play an important role in the early valuation
of Internet stocks. The first academic study about Internet valuations examined a sample of 63 publicly traded Internet firms in the late 1990s.15 The
study found that the number of unique visitors to a web site or the number
of pages on a site viewed per visit were directly correlated to a company’s
stock price even after controlling for the company’s current financial performance. The power of a given nonfinancial metric, however, depended on
the company. For portal and content companies such as Yahoo, page views
and unique visitors were both correlated to a company’s market value. For
e-tailers such as Amazon.com, only the page views per visit were correlated
with value. Evidently, the market believed “stopping by” would not translate to future value for e-tailers.
For Internet companies in the late 1990s, investors focused on nonfinancial metrics because early financial results were unrelated to longterm valuation creation. As the industry matured, however, financial
metrics became increasingly important. Later research found gross profit
and R&D spending became increasingly predictive, whereas nonfinancial
data lost power.16 This research indicates a return to traditional valuation
metrics even for the “new economy” stocks, as the relevance of nonfinancial metrics diminished over the 24-month testing period.
Two cautionary notes about using nonfinancial multiples to analyze
and value companies: First, nonfinancial multiples should be used only
when they provide incremental explanatory power above financial multiples. If a company cannot translate visitors, page views, or subscribers
into profits and cash flow, the nonfinancial metric is meaningless, and a
multiple based on financial forecasts is better. Second, nonfinancial multiples, like all multiples, are relative valuation tools. They measure one company’s valuation relative to another, normalized by some measure of size.
They do not measure absolute valuation levels. To value a company correctly, one must always remember to ask: Is a value of $2,038 per customer
too much?
15

B. Trueman, M. H. F. Wong, and X. J. Zhang, “The Eyeballs Have It: Searching for the Value in
Internet Stocks,” Journal of Accounting Research, 38 (2000): 137–162.
16
P. Jorion and E. Talmor, “Value Relevance of Financial and Non Financial Information in
Emerging Industries: The Changing Role of Web Traffic Data” (working paper no. 021, London
Business School Accounting Subject Area, 2001).

390

USING MULTIPLES FOR VALUATION

SUMMARY
Of the available valuation tools, discounted cash flow continues to deliver
the best results. However, a thoughtful multiples analysis merits a place in
your tool kit as well. When that analysis is careful and well reasoned, it not
only provides a useful check of your DCF forecasts but also provides critical
insights into what drives value in a given industry. Just be sure that you analyze the underlying reasons that multiples differ from company to company. When possible, base your analysis on forward-looking numbers.
Focus on enterprise value and remove nonoperating items from your analysis. Never view multiples as a shortcut. Instead, approach your multiples
analysis with as much care as you bring to DCF analysis.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Compare and contrast the following relative valuation models: P/E
Model, PEG Model, P/B Model, P/S Model.
2. Why is it important that management perform a supplemental valuation analysis employing a relative valuation model?
3. Discuss the importance of selecting comparable companies when estimating the appropriate relative valuation model.
4. Identify and discuss the four best practices applied to the construction of a relative valuation multiplier.
5. Compare and contrast the relative P/E valuation model to the DCF
valuation model.
6. How does the relative valuation model differ from the enterprise valuation model?

Part Three

Making Value Happen

13
Performance Measurement
Part One of this book explained the basic principles of value creation, and Part
Two detailed how to estimate a company’s value. Part Three, beginning with
this chapter, looks at value creation from a managerial perspective, examining several topics: managing performance to increase ROIC and growth; creating value through mergers, acquisitions, and divestitures; using capital
structure to support value creation; and communicating effectively with investors to ensure that the company’s stock price reflects its intrinsic value.
To address these topics, we need a way to decide if a company is doing a
good job of creating value. That requires measurement of corporate performance, a task that is more difficult than most think. Many investors, boards
of directors, and executives are happy and, to some extent, complacent
when earnings per share and stock price are increasing. That certainly was
the case in the late 1990s, when most share prices were rising, the economy
was strong, and corporate profits were robust. But some of the profits reported were not sustainable (some were even based on accounting fraud),
and in some cases, stock prices became disconnected from the companies’
underlying performance. Conversely, a declining share price may not signal
poor performance. Home Depot’s share price declined between 1999 and
2003, yet as you will see later in this chapter, the company surpassed every
North American retailer except Wal-Mart in creating value.
The Internet bubble and recent corporate scandals have prodded boards
of directors, senior managers, and investors to rethink how they assess corporate performance. Good accounting results and a rising stock price can
be misleading and may not indicate whether a company is fundamentally
“healthy” in the sense of being able to improve current performance and
profitably build future business. True assessment of a company’s health
requires dissecting and understanding the underlying drivers of earnings
Special thanks to Richard Dobbs, who co-wrote this chapter.

393

394

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT

Exhibit 13.1 Value Is Driven by Performance and Health
Performance
Capital markets value

Growth

Intrinsic value

Health
• Short-term
• Medium-term
• Long-term
• Organizational

ROIC

Value of discounted
cash flow
• Total returns to
shareholders
• Market value
added

Cost of capital

growth and stock price increases. Board members, as representatives of the
company’s stockholders with access to internal information, have a special
obligation to dig deeper into their companies’ operating and financial performance to assess long-term health.
The framework presented in Exhibit 13.1 demonstrates the links between shareholder value, as measured by the stock market, and the drivers
of value. The left side of the exhibit reports recent performance in the stock
market and the company’s stock price. As we demonstrated in Chapters 3
and 4, a company’s market value is driven by the discounted value of its expected cash flows, its “intrinsic” value. While a valuable tool for strategic
analysis, intrinsic DCF cannot be used to evaluate historical performance
because it is based on subjective projections. But DCF value can be linked to
key financial indicators. The financial drivers of cash flow and DCF value
are growth (in revenues and profits) and return on invested capital (relative
to a company’s cost of capital).
Since only a company’s historical growth and returns on capital—not its
future performance—can be measured directly, the potential for future
growth and returns must be inferred. To do so, it is necessary to devise metrics for the longer-term health of companies to complement the metrics for
their short-term performance. Think of a patient visiting his doctor. The patient may be feeling fine, in the sense of meeting requirements for weight,
strength, and energy. But if his cholesterol is too high, he may need to take
corrective action now to prevent future heart disease. Similarly, if a company
shows strong growth and return on capital, it still needs to determine if the
performance is sustainable. Understanding these health indicators can tell us

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT

395

how a company achieved its financial results. For example, did it sacrifice
long-term value creation for short-term financial results? Evaluating value
drivers will also help us identify value creation opportunities so the organization can focus on high-priority opportunities.
With this framework in mind, we can organize performance measurement around three questions:
1. Historically, how much economic value has the company created (as
measured by the company’s financial statements)? We will refer to
this measure as performance.
2. How well positioned is the company to create additional economic
value in the future, and what risks may prevent this value creation?
We will refer to this set of metrics as the company’s health.
3. Is the company’s current market value in line with its historical performance and potential economic value creation? What accounts for
recent changes in its stock price?
The first question addresses historical financial performance. This appears straightforward, but some ways of measuring historical financial performance are better than others. Financial metrics that can be linked directly
to value creation (e.g., economic profit, ROIC, and growth) are more meaningful than traditional accounting metrics, such as earnings per share. However, every historical measure has two potential flaws. First, historical
financial metrics are subjective; accountants and managers must make
judgments about when to record revenues and costs. Often, this judgment is
colored by personal incentives (e.g., their boss wants the current quarter to
look good). The second, and perhaps more important, flaw is that historical
financial metrics cannot capture the trade-offs managers constantly make
between achieving short-term financial results and investing for the future.
The second question addresses the company’s health by examining the
underlying drivers of a company’s financial performance. Specifically, how
did the company achieve its recent financial results, and did the company
sacrifice future performance to achieve those results? Health metrics compensate for the shortcomings of historical performance metrics and give us
a glimpse into the future. For instance, does the company have the products, people, and processes to create additional value? Another important
dimension of corporate health is an assessment of the risks the company
faces and the procedures in place to mitigate those risks.
As a final assessment of corporate performance, we examine the performance of the company’s stock price. Given that stock price improvement
is the ultimate objective of the company’s shareholders and that stock
prices often provide more objective assessments of value than management, we might expect to examine stock price performance first, not last.

396

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT

Yet examining stock price without the proper context too easily leads to
mistaken impressions. For instance, consider an oil company whose improving stock price reflects rising oil prices, rather than improved techniques in exploration, or a bank’s rising stock price that reflects falling
interest rates, not increased efficiencies. A board of directors that is complacent with strong stock price performance caused by factors outside
management control will all too quickly despair when outside factors eventually turn against the company.
When evaluating changes in stock price, management must also ask
whether the company’s stock price properly reflects the company’s historical performance and future prospects. If not, does the difference result from
the market’s failure to understand the company’s potential or from management’s excessive optimism about what has been and can be achieved?
A holistic assessment of corporate performance that answers all three
questions is far superior to any single performance measure. The process
helps managers make trade-offs between short- and long-term value creation and determine how to best communicate the company’s value to investors. It helps board members assess the actions managers are taking. It
helps investors decide whether the current price is fair.

PERFORMANCE: VALUE DELIVERED
As we demonstrated in Chapter 3, value and value creation are driven by
growth and return on capital, so it is natural that growth and return on invested capital will be the starting point for measuring corporate performance. Specifically, how does the company’s ROIC compare with its cost of
capital and the ROICs of its peers? Has ROIC been increasing or decreasing? How fast has the company grown, both absolutely and relative to
peers? Is its growth accelerating or decelerating?
Why not use the most common measure of corporate performance, earnings per share? Although companies that grow with an ROIC greater than
the cost of capital will also generate attractive EPS growth, the inverse is not
true. Companies with strong EPS growth may not be creating value if EPS
growth comes from heavy investment or changes in the company’s financial structure.
One disadvantage of ROIC and growth, however, is that both are measured as percentages. Neither incorporates the magnitude of value creation,
so a small company or business unit with a 30 percent ROIC will appear
more successful than an enormous company with a 20 percent ROIC. To
overcome this, economic profit converts ROIC into a dollar measure, so the
size of value creation can be incorporated into comparisons with other companies. Furthermore, economic profit can also be used to measure the tradeoff between growth and ROIC.

PERFORMANCE: VALUE DELIVERED

397

We can see this in a comparison of two companies. Recall from Chapter
3 the definition of economic profit:
Economic Profit = Invested Capital × (ROIC − WACC)

Assume two companies have identical WACCs equal to 10 percent. Company A earns a 20 percent ROIC on $10 billion of invested capital, so its
economic profit equals $1 billion. Company B earns a 30 percent ROIC on
only $2 billion of invested capital, so its economic profit equals $400 million. Which company is performing better? Company A creates more economic profit, but Company B has a higher ROIC. It is impossible to say one
company is better than the other. Instead, an assessment of the companies
should consider their performance relative to peers, the size of their product markets, and similar factors.
To illustrate key points of corporate performance measurement, we compare Home Depot with a broad sample of retailers. Our sample includes all
American retailers with 2003 revenues of more than $6 billion (given industry differences, we exclude grocery retailers). For presentation purposes, we
show only about three companies from each retail subsector. Even though
most large retailers do not compete directly with Home Depot, it is insightful to see Home Depot’s performance relative to all other large retailers.
Home Depot’s average ROIC over the five years ended in 2003 was 15.6
percent, higher than its 9.2 percent cost of capital during this period. While
Home Depot’s ROIC is the highest among the large American retailers (see
Exhibit 13.2 on p. 398), many companies have ROICs greater than 25 percent in other industries, including pharmaceuticals, consumer packaged
goods, and high-performing industrials. But is the performance of other
industries even relevant? In the case of Home Depot, we believe the proper
comparison is other retailers. Retailers, by nature, require significant physical assets ( buildings and fixtures) and inventories. Further, they sell the
same or very similar products as other retailers, so competition constrains
their margins.
As Exhibit 13.2 also demonstrates, there are winners and losers in retail. Relatively young retailers (those less than 35 years old) are earning
ROICs in the midteens (more than the cost of capital). Older companies are
struggling to earn their cost of capital.
Home Depot’s revenues grew an average of 16.5 percent annually between 1999 and 2003, once again at the high end of large retailers. This performance is exceptional for a company that was already one of the largest
retailers in the United States. Even so, the company’s primary competitor,
Lowe’s, grew faster. Its faster growth, however, started from a smaller base.
Thus, by 2003, Home Depot’s revenues of $65 billion were still more than
twice the $31 billion earned by Lowe’s. From a growth perspective, we
again see winners and losers among the large retailers. In general, the older

398

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT

Exhibit 13.2 Returns on Capital and Growth for Leading Retailers,
1999–2003
percent
5-year average ROIC1
Home Depot

15.6

Best Buy

14.5

Wal-Mart

11.9

Lowe’s

11.6

May

11.5

Gap

10.3

Target

10.1

Staples

9.2

Sears

8.8

Office Depot

8.0

Federated

6.9

5-year average revenue growth rate
16.5
19.5
13.3
20.3
(0.1)
11.9
9.3
13.1
(0.1)
6.6
(0.7)

JCPenney

4.7

(10.7)

Toys “R” Us

4.6

0.7

Dillard’s

4.1

(0.4)

1

With operating lease adjustments.

retailers were shrinking while the successful companies grew much faster
than the American economy.
We next consider economic profit, to counter the disadvantage of ROIC
and growth being percentage metrics that fail to factor company size into
comparisons. Exhibit 13.3 shows the economic profit for the large retailers.
Second only to Wal-Mart, Home Depot generated $7.1 billion in economic
profit over the five years through 2003.
Examining the retailers as a group, rankings based on economic profit
differ from those compiled using ROIC and growth, with Wal-Mart and
Home Depot moving into a class of their own. Highfliers, such as Best Buy,
may have high ROIC and superior growth, but they generate those results
on much less capital than Wal-Mart and Home Depot.
EPS may be the most often cited metric of historical financial performance, but it is not very useful for assessing corporate performance. It combines financing, one-time items, and other factors that hide a company’s
true performance, rather than illuminating it. The perception that net in-

PERFORMANCE: VALUE DELIVERED

399

Exhibit 13.3 Cumulative Economic Profit for Leading Retailers, 1999–2003
$ millions

Cumulative economic profit
Wal-Mart

9,509
7,147

Home Depot
Lowe’s

1,822

May

1,682

Target

1,622

Best Buy

1,100

Gap

757

Staples

17

Office Depot

(13)

Federated

(654)

Dillard’s

(1,054)

Toys “R” Us

(1,418)

Sears

(2,036)

JCPenney

(2,380)

come and EPS collapse performance into a single number is simply mistaken. Measuring performance using EPS alone is flawed, in that it ignores
the opportunity cost of equity capital. In addition, it is surprisingly easy to
manipulate net income and EPS, in particular, through financing decisions
unrelated to the company’s operating performance.
For example, let’s say a company you are analyzing is considering a $1
billion acquisition, which it plans to finance with new debt. The company’s
cost of debt equals 6 percent, and its weighted average cost of capital is 9
percent. As a result of the acquisition, the company would earn an extra
$100 million in operating profits and pay $60 million in interest expense (it
borrows at 6 percent) and $16 million in income taxes (assuming a 40 percent tax rate). Thus, following the acquisition, the acquirer’s net income
would increase by $24 million.
What would be the impact on economic profit? Based on the figures
given, the company’s economic profit would decline by $30 million, calculated as follows. The company’s after-tax return on new capital (6 percent)
equals the extra after-tax operating profits ($100 million less taxes of $40
million, or $60 million) divided by the required investment ($1 billion).

400

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT

Subtracting the 9 percent cost of capital from the 6 percent return on
capital yields a spread of −3 percent. Multiply the spread by the new capital;
the result is a $30 million decline in economic profit.
Net income would increase by $24 million, but economic profit would
decline by $30 million. Which figure better captures value creation? Economic profit does. The key assumption in generating additional EPS is that
the acquisition can be financed entirely with debt. This assumption is
wrong. The only reason the company can finance the acquisition with all
debt is that its remaining businesses would act as collateral. In reality, the
company would borrow against its other businesses’ cash flow, not just the
cash flow from the acquisition. The acquisition is supported by, say, only 25
percent debt and 75 percent equity, where the opportunity cost of equity (especially on an after-tax basis) will be much higher than the after-tax cost of
debt, even though the cost of equity doesn’t show up in the EPS calculation.
To break even in terms of value creation, the acquisition must earn $90
million after taxes or $150 million in pretax operating profits. So the company would have a shortfall of $50 million in operating profits, despite increasing its net income.
In fact, to generate EPS growth, there is no reason even to make an acquisition. EPS growth can be generated through financing decisions alone.
For example, many companies repurchase shares solely to meet EPS targets.
While there are many legitimate reasons to repurchase shares, increasing
EPS is not one of them. For most companies, repurchasing shares will mechanically increase EPS regardless of value creation. As long as the price
paid for the shares (in terms of a price-earnings multiple) is less than the
multiple on the debt assumed or cash used, EPS will increase.
To see how this works, assume a company borrows at 6 percent and gets
a tax benefit of 40 percent for its borrowing. The implied P/E ratio on new
debt is 1/[0.06 × (1 − 0.40)], or 27.8 times. As long as the company repurchases its shares at less than 27.8 times earnings (as about 90 percent of
companies can), earnings per share will increase as income decreases more
slowly than shares outstanding. However, if a company takes on more debt,
all else equal, its shares become riskier, and its cost of equity will increase,
which should reduce its P/E ratio. Financial statements explicitly recognize
only the gains from share repurchases, and not the costs.
Net income and EPS also are subject to one-time gains and losses.
While these gains and losses are real, too often companies use one-time
gains and losses to smooth out their operating performance or hit earnings targets. Among the large retailers analyzed earlier, the largest increase in EPS was generated by Sears, which increased its EPS by 34
percent from 1999 to 2003. Yet most of this increase was due to one-time
gains from asset sales and the impact of share repurchases, rather than
increases in operating performance. We know of one company whose annual report cover proudly advertised the company’s nearly 20 percent EPS

HEALTH: SCOPE TO CREATE ADDITIONAL VALUE

401

growth over four years. But when we stripped out one-time items and the
impact of share repurchases, operating profits were up only 4 percent a
year. Not surprisingly, the company’s stock price failed to increase in line
with EPS.
Despite our critique of net income and EPS, we don’t advocate ignoring
them entirely. Companies that generate strong growth and earn high returns on capital will also post strong increases in net income and EPS. But
keep in mind that, particularly over a one- to three-year period, it is easy to
boost net income and EPS without strong operating performance as measured by revenue growth, ROIC, and economic profit.

HEALTH: SCOPE TO CREATE ADDITIONAL VALUE
Even though financial metrics like ROIC and growth outperform EPS in
measuring historical performance, they cannot capture the trade-offs between short-term financial results and investment for future earnings. To
do this, we need to measure the company’s health. This second dimension
of corporate performance measurement examines the underlying drivers of
a company’s financial performance to determine whether the company is
prepared to create value in the future.
To see the critical difference between performance and health, consider
the dynamics in the pharmaceutical industry. In the year after the patent on
a drug expires, sales of that drug often decline by 50 percent to 75 percent or
more, as generic producers lower prices and steal market share. When a
major product will be going off patent in a couple of years with no replacement on the horizon, investors know future profits will suffer. In such a
case, the company could have strong current performance but a low market
value. In retailing, chains can sometimes maintain margins by scrimping on
store refurbishment and brand building. Consider the aging Kmart and Toys
“R” Us chains, both seriously wounded by Wal-Mart’s and Target’s new,
clean stores.
To identify a company’s key health metrics, start with a value creation
tree, as shown in Exhibit 13.4 on page 402. The value creation tree illustrates
the connections between intrinsic value and generic categories of health
metrics. Value is ultimately driven by a company’s long-term growth and its
return on invested capital (relative to its cost of capital). The health metrics
are the short-, medium-, and long-term metrics that ultimately determine a
company’s long-term growth and ROIC.
The framework in Exhibit 13.4 shares some elements with a popular
framework known as the “balanced scorecard.” Based on a 1992 Harvard
Business Review article by Robert Kaplan and David Norton,1 the idea of a
1
Robert S. Kaplan and David P. Norton, “The Balanced Scorecard: Measures That Drive Performance,” Harvard Business Review, 80(1) ( January 1992): 71–79.

402

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT

Exhibit 13.4 Categories of Health Metrics
Short-term
metrics

Long-term
growth

Intrinsic
value

Medium-term
metrics

Sales
productivity

Commercial
health

Operating
cost
productivity

Cost
structure
health

Capital
productivity

Asset health

Long-term
metrics
Strategic
health
• Core
business
• Growth
opportunities

ROIC

Cost of
capital

Organizational
health

balanced scorecard has spawned numerous nonprofit and for-profit organizations to advocate and implement the idea. The premise of the balanced
scorecard is that financial performance is only one aspect of performance.
Kaplan and Norton point to three equally important perspectives on performance: customer satisfaction, internal business processes, and learning and
growth. Although our concept of health metrics resembles Kaplan and Norton’s nonfinancial metrics, we differ in advocating that companies develop
their own metrics tailored to their industry and strategy, based on rigorous
analytics, and linked as explicitly as possible to metrics for value creation.
Tailoring is critical; without it, setting strategic priorities is difficult. For example, product innovation is important in some industries, while in others,
tight cost control and customer service matter more.
Every company will have its own health metrics, but the eight generic
categories presented in Exhibit 13.4 ensure that a company has systematically explored all the important ones. Short-term metrics, on the left side of
the exhibit, are typically the easiest to quantify and measure. They also can
be measured and monitored more frequently (monthly or quarterly). Moving to the right, medium-term and long-term metrics may be difficult to
quantify and may be measured annually or over even longer periods. In addition, as you move farther to the right, the performance metrics are increasingly difficult for outside parties, such as investors, to use.

HEALTH: SCOPE TO CREATE ADDITIONAL VALUE

403

Short-term metrics Short-term metrics are the immediate drivers of historical ROIC and growth. They are indicators of whether growth and ROIC
over the short term can be sustained, or whether they will improve or decline. They might include metrics such as cost per unit for a manufacturing
company or same-store sales growth for a retailer.
Following the growth and ROIC framework, short-term metrics fall into
three categories:
1. Sales productivity metrics are the drivers of recent sales growth, such
as price and quantity, market share, the company’s ability to charge
higher prices relative to peers (or charge a premium for its product or
services), sales force productivity, and same-store sales growth versus new-store growth for a retailer.
2. Operating cost productivity metrics are typically drivers of unit costs,
such as the component costs for building an automobile or delivering
a package. UPS, for example, is well known for charting out the optimal delivery path of its drivers to enhance their productivity and for
developing well-defined standards on how to deliver packages.
3. Capital productivity measures how well a company uses its working
capital (inventories, receivables, and payables) and its property,
plant, and equipment. Dell revolutionized the personal-computer
business by building to order so it could minimize inventories. Because the company keeps inventory levels so low and has few receivables to boot, it can operate with negative working capital.
Home Depot’s short-term health was strong across a number of fronts.
From a growth perspective, Home Depot increased its store count by about
13.4 percent a year between 1999 and 2003, while simultaneously increasing same-store sales (known as comps) by 3.5 percent. From a profitability
perspective, Home Depot’s ROIC increased from 14.9 percent to 18.2 percent, due to improvements in margins, partly offset by a drop in capital efficiency. Gross margin (revenues less cost of goods sold), increased from
30.9 percent to 33.4 percent, due largely to improving purchasing and the
development of exclusive product lines from manufacturers. The increase
in gross margin was partly offset by higher selling, general, and administrative expenses due to increased investment in advertising and store modernization. In addition, management of working capital improved slightly,
though this was offset by additional investment in the stores.
When assessing short-term corporate performance, separate the effects
of forces that are outside management’s control ( both good and bad) from
things management can influence. For instance, upstream oil company executives shouldn’t get much credit for higher profits that result from higher
oil prices, nor should real estate executives get much credit for higher real

404

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT

estate prices (and the resulting higher commissions). Oil company performance should be evaluated with an emphasis on reserves and production
growth, exploration costs, and drilling costs. Real estate brokerages should
be evaluated primarily on the number of sales and ability to cross-sell.

Medium-term metrics Medium-term metrics go beyond short-term performance by looking forward to indicate whether a company can maintain and
improve its growth and ROIC over the next one to five years (or longer for
companies, such as pharmaceutical manufacturers, that have long product
cycles). The medium-term metrics fall into three categories:
1. Commercial health metrics indicate whether the company can sustain
or improve its current revenue growth. These metrics include the
company’s product pipeline (talent and technology to bring new
products to market over the medium term), brand strength (investment in brand building), and customer satisfaction. Commercial
health metrics vary widely by industry. For a pharmaceutical company, the obvious priority is its product pipeline. For an online retailer, customer satisfaction and brand strength may be the most
important components of medium-term commercial health.
2. Cost structure health measures a company’s ability to manage its costs
relative to competitors over three to five years. These metrics might
include assessments of programs such as Six Sigma, which companies including General Electric use to reduce their costs continually and to maintain a cost advantage relative to their competitors
across most of their businesses.
3. Asset structure health measures how well a company maintains and
develops its assets. For a hotel or restaurant chain, the average time
between remodeling projects may be an important driver of health.
In the quest for growth during the 1990s, Home Depot temporarily lost
sight of its medium-term health as measured by its customer service and
the quality of its stores. Recognizing the problem, in 2001 the company
began to reinvest in its existing locations, with the intention of making
them more appealing to customers, and to refocus on customer service—for
example, by raising its incentives for employees. It also offered installation
services and do-it-yourself clinics and set up sales desks specifically for
professional customers. Continued success will depend on its ability to go
on satisfying its customers by carefully measuring and monitoring its customer service, its customer traffic, and the age and condition of its stores.

Long-term strategic health Metrics for long-term strategic health show
the ability of an enterprise to sustain its current operating activities and to

HEALTH: SCOPE TO CREATE ADDITIONAL VALUE

405

identify and exploit new growth areas. A company must periodically assess
and measure the threats—including new technologies, changes in customer
preferences, and new ways of serving customers—that could make its current business less profitable. In assessing a company’s long-term strategic
health, it can be hard to identify specific metrics; those situations require
more qualitative milestones, such as progress in selecting partners for
mergers or for entering a market.
While Home Depot’s leading position in the home improvement business appears to be solid in the medium term, a longer term threat comes
from Wal-Mart, which sells many of the same fast-moving items, such as
light bulbs. The cost base of Wal-Mart is lower because it provides less instore help than does Home Depot, which must therefore ensure that store
associates focus on higher-margin areas where support is critical (such as
plumbing) rather than on products whose price doesn’t incorporate assistance to customers.
Besides guarding against threats, companies must continually watch for
new growth opportunities, whether in related industries or new geographies. For example, many Western companies have begun preparing for
China’s enormous, fast-growing markets. Microsoft has sought other profitable businesses beyond Windows by investing heavily in games, Internet
services, and software for handheld devices.
Adding new services helped Home Depot to squeeze more profits from
its existing stores, but it has been less successful at expanding abroad and at
developing new store formats. By 2003, only 7 percent of its revenues came
from outside North America, and though it has experimented with new
store formats, such as its Expo Design Center, only 4 percent of its stores
used them as of 2003.

Organizational health The final element of corporate health, organizational health, measures whether the company has the people, skills, and
culture to sustain and improve its performance. Diagnostics of organizational health typically measure the skills and capabilities of a company, its
ability to retain its employees and keep them satisfied, its culture and values, and the depth of its management talent. Again, what is important varies
by industry. Pharmaceutical companies need deep scientific-innovation
capabilities but relatively few managers. Retailers need lots of trained
stored managers, a few great merchandisers, and in most cases, store staff
with a customer service orientation.
Given Home Depot’s rapid growth and substantial size, one of its core
challenges continues to be attracting and retaining skilled employees at a
competitive cost. When it took on lower-cost part-time workers, who often
knew much less than its traditional store associates did, customers began to
wonder what made the company special. Even holding on to its store managers became a problem, since the drive for efficiency through centralization

406

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT

stifled the company’s original entrepreneurial spirit. To address the longterm challenges, the company began offering incentive programs for management and added more full-time staff in stores—moves that have been
credited with helping to improve same-store sales.2

Identify and Analyze Potential Risks
A final dimension of corporate health that investors and boards should
evaluate is risk. What risks is the company exposed to, and how has the
management team decided to manage each risk? Most risks come from outside the company—for example, commodity price risk, technology risk, and
competitive risk. But some risks come from inside the company, including
the risk of employee malfeasance or system failures. Risks can be mitigated
through a conservative capital structure, hedging, or backup systems. In
any case, risk and risk mitigation are a necessary element of corporate performance measurement.

STOCK MARKET PERFORMANCE
The final step in assessing a company’s performance is examining its stock
price performance, viewing performance in the stock market as an external
assessment of a company’s performance and health. In an ideal world, we
would only have to look in the newspapers to understand how well a company was doing in the stock market. But performance in the stock market is
anything but easy to interpret.
The most common approach to measuring stock market performance is
to measure total returns to shareholders (TRS) over a period of time, where
TRS is defined as share price appreciation plus dividends. TRS has severe
limitations; however, it doesn’t measure actual performance, but rather
performance against expectations, which can severely penalize the bestperforming companies. To mitigate this problem, we introduce another set
of metrics for stock market performance: market value added (MVA) and
market-value-to-capital. Both statistics measure the stock market’s assessment of how much value a company can create in the future.
A second problem with metrics for stock market performance is that the
stock market has limited information about a company’s performance and
potential, so a company’s value in the stock market can sometimes deviate
from its intrinsic value. The only way to solve this problem is to limit how

2
Justin Lahart, “Housing Just Keeps Going Up,” Fortune ( June 8, 2003), http://www.fortune
.com/fortune/subs/article/0,15114,455936-2,00.ht ml; and Betty Schiffman, “Home Depot Remodels Its Growth Plans,” Forbes (November 30, 2001), http://www.forbes.com/2001/11/30
/1130homedepot.ht ml.

STOCK MARKET PERFORMANCE

407

we use stock market metrics. Management teams and boards of directors
should use these metrics as a secondary source of performance insight, asking only, “Does the stock market value of a company accurately reflect its
value creation potential?”

Measuring Stock Market Performance: The Expectations Treadmill
The problem with TRS as a performance measure is that, over shorter periods, TRS represents more about changes in expectations of performance
than about performance itself. As a result, companies that have consistently
met high performance standards can have difficulty delivering high TRS.
The market may believe that management is doing an outstanding job, but
its approval has already been factored into the share price.
One way to understand the problem is by analogy to a treadmill. The
speed of the treadmill represents the expectations for future performance
implicit in the share price. If managers beat these expectations, the market
raises the company’s stock price but also accelerates the treadmill. Thus, as
performance improves, the expectations treadmill turns faster. The better
managers perform, the more the market expects from them; they have to
run the treadmill ever faster just to keep up.
For outstanding companies, the treadmill moves faster than for anyone
else. It is difficult for management to deliver at the expected level without
faltering. Accelerating the treadmill will be hard; continuing to do so will
eventually become impossible. Consider the case of Tina Turnaround. Tina
has just been hired as CEO of Widgets “R” Us. The company’s margins and
growth are below those of competitors. The market doesn’t expect much, so
its share price is low. Tina hires a top-notch team and gets to work. After
two years, Widgets is catching up to its peers in margins and return on capital, and market share is rising. Widgets’ stock price rises twice as fast as its
peers’ stock prices, because the market wasn’t expecting the company’s
turnaround.
Tina and her team continue their hard work. After two more years, Widgets has become the industry leader, with the highest ROIC. Its share price
has risen at four times the rate of the industry. Given the company’s consistent performance, the market expects the company to continue earning
above-average returns and revenue growth. As time goes by, Widgets maintains its high ROIC and leading market share. But two years later, Tina is
surprised to see that the shares of Widgets have done no better than its
peers’ stock prices, even though the company has outperformed its rivals in
both ROIC and growth. Tina has been caught by the expectations treadmill.
She and her team have done such a good job that the expectation of continued high performance is already incorporated into the company’s share
price. As long as she delivers results in line with the market’s expectations,
her company’s share price performance will be no better than average.

408

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT

This explains why extraordinary managers may deliver only ordinary
TRS in the short run. Conversely, managers of companies with low performance expectations might find it easy to earn high TRS. This predicament
illustrates the old saying about the difference between a good company and
a good investment: in the short term, good companies may not be good investments, and vice versa.
One way to overcome the limitations of TRS is to employ complementary metrics for stock market performance. One such measure is market
value added (MVA), popularized by the consulting firm Stern Stewart & Co.
MVA is the difference between the market value of a company’s debt and
equity and the amount of capital invested. A related measure, expressed as
a ratio, is the market-value-to-capital ratio—the ratio of a company’s debt
and equity to the amount of capital invested.
MVA and the market-value-to-capital ratio complement TRS by measuring different aspects of a company’s performance. TRS can be likened to a
treadmill’s change in speed; it measures performance against the expectations of the financial markets and changes in these expectations. MVA and
market-value-to-capital, in contrast, can be likened to the current speed of
the treadmill. They measure the financial market’s view of the future performance relative to the capital invested in the business, so they assess expectations for the absolute level of performance.
Let’s examine Home Depot and the other large retailers in terms of
their performance in the stock market. The market value of Home Depot’s
debt and equity (including capitalized operating leases) was $88 billion at
the end of 2003, with $8 billion in debt and operating leases and $80 billion
in equity. At the end of 2003, the company had invested $29 billion in operating capital (working capital, the capitalized value of operating leases, and
property, plant, and equipment). Therefore, Home Depot’s MVA was $59
billion, and its market-value-to-capital ratio was 3.1.
The MVA of Home Depot was the industry’s second highest, behind
only Wal-Mart and far ahead of the others (see Exhibit 13.5). In terms of
market-value-to-capital, Home Depot is also at the high end of the scale. It
is not expected to generate as much value per dollar of capital as some highfliers (such as Best Buy), but it makes up for that with its size.
What about TRS? Over the five years ended 2003, Home Depot’s—at
−2.3 percent per year—was near the bottom of the group. The company
delivered a strong economic profit, the second-highest MVA, and a strong
market-value-to-capital ratio but also had very low TRS. Evidently, Home
Depot’s performance over this period was below the level the market expected at the beginning of the measurement period (1999). We’ll explore
the reasons for Home Depot’s low TRS a bit later, but first we will introduce
the “expectations treadmill matrix,” a snapshot of the market performance
for a group of companies—in this case, large American retailers.

STOCK MARKET PERFORMANCE

409

Exhibit 13.5 MVA and Market-Value-to-Capital: Absolute and
Relative Measures
December 2003
MVA ($ billion)

Market-value-to-capital ratio

Wal-Mart

188.6

Home Depot

3.5

59.2

Lowe’s

3.1
3.1

33.7

Target

2.1

26.2

Gap

20.2

2.8

Sears

16.8

2.4

Best Buy

15.8

Staples

12.4

JCPenney

10.8

3.5
2.8
2.0

May

6.9

1.8

Federated

5.2

1.4

Office Depot

4.4

1.8

Toys “R” Us (0.4)

1.0

Dillard’s (1.8)

0.7

The treadmill matrix plots market value to capital on the horizontal
axis and TRS on the vertical axis. (We use the market-value-to-capital ratio
in this example because a size-based measure, such as MVA, is difficult to
graph effectively.) Exhibit 13.6 on page 410 presents the treadmill matrix
for the large American retailers. The dashed lines represent the median
TRS and market-value-to-capital. Companies fall into each of the quadrants created by these medians.
Quadrant 1 companies have both a high TRS and high market value to
capital. These highfliers include Best Buy and Lowe’s. Quadrant 3 companies are the opposite, with low TRS and low market-value-to-capital ratios. Examples include Dillard’s and Toys “R” Us. Companies in Quadrants
1 and 3 are straightforward to evaluate because both performance metrics
are high or low.
The results of Quadrants 2 and 4 are more interesting. Quadrant 2 companies are recovering underperformers. This group includes the Limited

410

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT

Exhibit 13.6 Market-Value-to-Capital and TRS for Leading Retailers
percent

35

2

1
United Auto Group

30
25

Best Buy

Average annual TRS, Jan. 1999–Dec. 2003

20
15

Lowe’s
Kohl’s
Target
Dollar General

TJX
10
Sonic Auto
5

Limited

0
Toys “R” Us

–5
–10

Dillard’s

–15
–20

Office
Max

AutoNation
1

Federated
CVS

Office
Depot

Wal-Mart

Sears
Nordstrom
BJ’s CostCo
May 4
Walgreen

4

3
Home Depot

JCPenney
Gap

Staples

Circuit City

Saks
3

4

Market-value-to-capital, Dec. 2003

and United Auto Group. These companies have higher than median TRS
but low-market-value-to-capital. Five years ago, when expectations of their
performance were low, their market-value-to-capital ratios were even
poorer. The companies have since demonstrated better than expected performance, accelerating their treadmill, but their market-value-to-capital ratios are nowhere near those of their top competitors.
Home Depot is in Quadrant 4, with low TRS but a higher than median
market-value-to-capital ratio. Home Depot is joined in this quadrant
by Walgreens, Staples, and the Gap. Historically, these retailers have been
some of the best in the United States. What’s going on? It is impossible to
say whether their position results from unrealistic market expectations
at the beginning of the period or from managers’ inability to realize
their companies’ potential. But consider that the beginning of our TRS
measurement period is 1999, near the top of the stock market cycle. As
we noted in Chapter 4, around 1999 the large-capitalization stocks had
much higher P/E ratios, probably at unreasonably high levels. This gap
has since closed. But this example demonstrates one of the pitfalls of using

STOCK MARKET PERFORMANCE

411

TRS as a performance measure: The results are highly dependent on the
starting date.

Is the Market Value in Line with Value Creation Potential?
The final step in assessing a company’s performance is linking the company’s market value to its intrinsic value creation potential. We can do this
by reverse engineering the company’s share price, essentially using a DCF
model and estimating the required performance (growth and ROIC) to generate the current share price. We can then evaluate how difficult it will be
for the company to achieve the required level of performance.
In Chapter 5, we summarized a DCF valuation of Home Depot in which
the value approximated Home Depot’s market value at the end of 2003. The
underlying projections assumed that Home Depot would continue to earn
an ROIC of about 18 to 19 percent per year, the same as its 2003 ROIC, yet
higher than its ROIC range over the three prior years of 14.9 percent to 16.3
percent. The DCF valuation also assumed that Home Depot’s growth would
slow from its historically high rates. Revenue growth averaged 16.5 percent
during the five years ended 2003. Our projection assumed declining growth
from approximately 12 percent in 2004 to 5 percent annually by 2013. This
forecast of declining growth and constant ROIC resulted in a DCF equity
value of $73 billion, which is within the trading range of Home Depot’s
shares. Other projections—for example, high growth and lower ROIC—
could lead to the same value, but we’ll explore this scenario.
Is the market value consistent with Home Depot’s intrinsic value creation potential? First, let’s examine the required growth. Using the growth
rates in our simple estimation leads to $83 billion of new revenues by 2013.
One equity analyst projects same-store sales growth of 3 percent to 4 percent, which is consistent with Home Depot’s historical rate of same-store
sales growth. With 4 percent same-store sales growth, Home Depot would
need to add 900 stores over the next 10 years (about 50 percent of its current
base). Yet one equity analyst estimated that the U.S. market for home improvement superstores was approximately 78 percent saturated at the end of
2003. Therefore, the growth rates in this scenario are plausible but difficult
to achieve, bringing Home Depot close to estimates of market saturation.
The growth implied by the share price appears reasonable and is consistent
with Home Depot’s recent announcement that it would open new stores at a
slower rate than previously. Instead, the company plans to invest in infrastructure improvements on its current base.
Second, we need to consider whether Home Depot can maintain its
ROIC at 18 percent to 19 percent. As Home Depot’s growth slows and it focuses on core operations, some of its earlier issues with managing growth
should be easier to deal with. But even as growth slows, competition with
Lowe’s could intensify. Furthermore, Wal-Mart has been selling more and

412

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT

more of the fast-moving items that Home Depot sells, potentially siphoning
off customers.
Home Depot’s current market value reflects business as usual with
healthy growth in a maturing market. As the market nears saturation,
Home Depot will face challenges in maintaining its ROIC while continuing
to grow, especially since it has not demonstrated much success outside
North America or with new store formats.
Having examined Home Depot’s current market value relative to its performance potential, we return to the company’s negative five-year TRS. Exhibit 13.7 shows an analysis of the change in Home Depot’s value over the
five years through 2003. We start with the market value in 1999 of $132 billion. If Home Depot had performed exactly as expected, its equity value
would have increased by the cost of equity (less dividends and share repurchases) to $197 billion at the end of 2003. The difference between that number
and its $80 billion market value at the end of 2003 is due to changes in performance expectations.
Assume that in 1999 the market estimated that margins and capital
turnover would remain at 1998 levels. Since operating margins actually increased, we estimate the market should have increased the company’s value
by $50 billion. The cost of equity, capital efficiency, and cash tax rate did not
change significantly during this period, so we attribute most of the remainder to changes in expectations for revenue growth. In Home Depot’s case,

Exhibit 13.7 Change in Equity Value for Home Depot
$ billion
50
69

(4)

(4)

8

(171)

197

132
80

Jan. 1999

Growth at
cost of
equity

Less
dividends
and share
repurchases

Time value of money

2003
Equity value
without
expectation
changes

Increase
in margin
by 180
basis points

Decreased
capital
efficiency

Change in
cash tax
rate

Change in
implied long
term revenue
growth

Jan. 2004

REVIEW QUESTIONS

413

growth expectations declined significantly, accounting for a $171 billion
drop in value. At the end of 2003, we estimated the revenue growth consistent with Home Depot’s share price to be about 8 percent annually for the
next 10 years. At the end of 1998 investors would have had to expect Home
Depot to grow 26 percent a year to justify the market value at the time. Such
high growth expectations would have required Home Depot to triple its
store count over 10 years, from 760 in 1998 to more than 2,300 in 2008, with
continued healthy growth until at least 2013, far beyond the saturation level
estimated by the equity analyst mentioned earlier. From this analysis, we
are tempted to conclude that Home Depot’s poor TRS since 1999 results
more from an overly optimistic market value at the beginning of the period
than from ineffective management.

SUMMARY
Insightful measurement of corporate performance is difficult. Simple approaches, such as EPS growth and TRS metrics, are inadequate. TRS is problematic because it does not consider how the market valued the company at
the start of the measurement period, a problem that can be remedied with
market valued added (MVA) and similar metrics. EPS does not take into
consideration the opportunity cost of capital and can be manipulated by
short-term actions. Revenue growth and ROIC are better measures of historical financial performance. However, all financial metrics—EPS, ROIC,
and TRS—are backward looking. Measurement of corporate performance
must also address a company’s health: how well it is positioned to sustain
and improve performance. Corporate health metrics explain how financial
results were achieved and provide insights into future performance that are
essential for truly understanding a company’s performance.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Identify the three dimensions of performance that should be considered when managers and investors evaluate the performance of a
company.
2. What is the relationship between ROIC and economic profit? Develop a rationale that will lead a manager to conclude that economic
profit is superior to ROIC.
3. Demonstrate how a manager either might smooth earnings or meet
EPS targets by repurchasing shares of their company’s common
stock.

414

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT

4. What is meant by the implied P/E on debt model? Explain how
changing a company’s leverage could be used to meet P/E or earnings targets.
5. Describe a value creation tree. What benefit does a manager gain by
employing a value creation tree analysis as an integral component of
performance measurement and analysis?
6. Define market value added. Does market value added provide the same
performance insights to the corporate executive as economic profit?
7. Go to the internet and gather information for Hutchinson Technologies (HTCH). From the information gathered:
a. Compute Hutchinson’s ROIC.
b. How much economic value has HTCH created?
c. How well positioned is the company to create additional economic
value in the future?
d. Is the company’s current market value in line with its historical
performance and potential value creation?

14
Performance Management

Value managers have a holy grail as unattainable as the object of the knightly
quests in the legend of King Arthur: a value creation purpose instilled in
each of the thousands of business decisions made at the company every day.
A single CEO or a small group of executives cannot make all these decisions,
which range from the profound to the mundane. Companies have therefore
established systems to ensure that decisions are consistent with short- and
long-term objectives and that the management team can clearly see how
those myriad decisions affect value creation.
These systems, called performance management systems, typically include long-term strategic plans, short-term budgets, capital budgeting systems, performance reporting and reviews, and compensation systems.
Successful value creation requires that all components of these management systems are aligned to the company’s strategy so as to encourage decisions that maximize value. For example, if product development is
important to the strategic plan, the short-term budget and capital budget
must include the necessary spending in the current year to develop the new
product, and performance reviews must evaluate progress on new products, not just short-term profits.
Performance management is where managers spend most of their time,
yet they are often dissatisfied with the results. They ask for the mystery
formula that will make the system work, or even the secret metric everyone
can work toward. Performance management is difficult, however, and offers no quick solutions. That said, a few lessons will make the process
more effective.
Special thanks to Richard Dobbs, who co-wrote this chapter.

415

416

PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

EVOLUTION OF PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
Until the mid-1980s, most companies’ performance management systems focused on maintaining the company as an ongoing enterprise and occasionally
on achieving targets for net income or EPS. Often, shareholders’ interests
were lined up only loosely with the interests of managers; compensation
primarily took the form of salary, and any bonuses were linked to shortterm earnings. Hostile takeovers were rare, so managers were comfortable in
their jobs.
In the late 1970s, theorists and practitioners including Joel Stern and Alfred Rappaport advocated a stronger link between the creation of shareholder value and the way companies were managed. This approach to
performance management became known as Value-Based Management
(VBM). The original, powerful idea behind VBM was to align the company’s
measurement system with economic value creation in a way that traditional
accounting-based measurement systems did not. The focus of these early
programs was ensuring that the measurement system fully took into account the cost of the capital tied up in the business. They did this by emphasizing metrics such as economic profit and economic value added
(EVA),1 which we discussed in Chapter 3. All these measures take into account the economic cost of the capital deployed in the business. For economic profit or EVA, calculation of the metric includes a specific charge for
the economic cost of the capital tied up in the business.
Aligning managerial compensation more closely with shareholder value
creation took root and gained wider acceptance. Companies linked management compensation explicitly to performance on economic profit or EVA.
Companies also made greater use of stock-based compensation, particularly executive stock options.
The ideas behind VBM were important advances in management. Today,
many businesses accept the ideas of linking management compensation to
shareholder value creation and of explicitly recognizing the opportunity
cost of equity capital. However, the results of many VBM programs were
mixed. For example, we examined the shareholder returns of a sample of
companies that publicly announced the adoption of VBM programs and
found that the number of companies outperforming their industry peers
three and five years later was not greater than the number that underperformed their peers. More than 20 years after VBM came onto the scene,
many managers are still struggling with their performance management
system and feel they somehow could be doing it more effectively.
The failure of many early VBM programs stemmed from two management mistakes. First, many managers ended up with VBM programs that
1
EVA is a registered trademark of Stern Stewart & Co. and is synonymous with the generic term
economic profit.

EFFECTIVE VALUE-BASED MANAGEMENT

417

continued to emphasize short-term performance. Second, managers tended
to overemphasize measurement and neglect the wider management
processes, such as integration of these new metrics into planning, performance reviews, and compensation. In this chapter, we explore each of
these problems.
Many VBM programs replaced net income or EPS with metrics such as
EVA or economic profit. Although the new metric was better than those it
replaced because it factored in the economic cost of the capital deployed in
the business, it was still essentially a one-year measure, focusing on shortterm performance. The new metric did not measure the company’s longterm health, so it encouraged managers to boost short-term performance
at the expense of investing in the long term. Managers had no incentive
to invest in product development, brand building, customer satisfaction,
or employee development. These VBM programs delivered short-term results that were not sustainable or that traded away opportunities for future growth.
Another reason early VBM programs failed was that companies focused too much on measurement and neglected to change the way the new
metrics were used. In effect, these companies developed first-rate valuebased measurement systems but had forgotten the management part. Some
companies never linked their performance measurement system to the way
they evaluated their people, so employees did not change what they focused on. Others treated their VBM program as just something else to do or
something run by the finance department independently of the line managers. One company, for instance, spent years setting up a so-called VBM
system featuring metrics that cascaded down throughout the business, elegant monthly management information reports, and a first-rate scorecard
covering financial performance, operating drivers, organizational health,
and customer service. But management did nothing to extend it from a discrete program in the finance department and engage the entire company.
Nearly a year later, the program had made no discernible impact. Beyond
top-level conversations, few managers used or understood the scorecard;
some did not even know what it was. They had no involvement in the program’s development, little understanding of the need for the new scorecard, and no incentive to use it.

EFFECTIVE VALUE-BASED MANAGEMENT
Successful as well as unsuccessful companies have seen that there are no
magic bullets for creating a successful performance management system.
Managers cannot delegate what is effectively their job to a “system.” Managers must still invest most of their time in performance management. The
success or failure of performance management depends not on a set of

418

PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

metrics, corporate calendars or templates, but mostly on the rigor and honesty of the process. Does the CEO add value by understanding the economics of the business units and being able to negotiate performance targets
that are both challenging and achievable? Are trade-offs between the short
and long term transparent?
When performance management is working well, it helps the layers
of the organization communicate frankly and effectively. It gives managers
space to manage, while assuring their bosses that the agreed-on level of performance will be achieved. In many companies, the only communication between layers of management involves whether a particular unit is reaching
its profit target. With a good performance management system, just as
much attention goes to the reason behind the profit achieved relative to target, and there is dialogue about concrete steps to improve performance.
Although we can offer no simple formulas, successful performance
management includes some important ingredients:
• Complete buy-in at all levels on the priority and mind-set of value creation.
Midlevel managers are unlikely to buy into managing for longer-term
value creation if top management regularly cuts R&D, advertising, or
employee development to make short-term profit targets. Without
leadership from the top, a company cannot build a successful performance management system.
• Clarity on which value drivers are fundamental to the performance and
health of the business. Many companies lack systematic processes for
identifying a business’s underlying value drivers and developing
metrics against these value drivers, such as product launch speed in
pharmaceuticals or the timing of new plant investments in commodity businesses like chemicals and paper.
• A target- and aspiration-setting process that provides real challenge and builds
commitment. The process should result in targets for which business
unit managers feel responsible. Targets must be difficult to achieve but
not so unreasonable that the managers treat them as fanciful.
• A fact-based performance review process that balances short-term performance and long-term growth. In too many performance reviews, senior
management does not understand enough about the business to assess
whether a business unit’s performance resulted from the management
team’s smarts and hard work or simply from good or bad luck.
• A strong link to accountability and the process for evaluating and remunerating people. The evaluation and remuneration of managers cannot be reduced to simple formulas tied to accounting results; it must be based
on a deeper assessment of accomplishments.
In the remainder of this chapter we explore these essentials in detail.

PERVASIVE VALUE CREATION MIND-SET

419

PERVASIVE VALUE CREATION MIND-SET
Companies that succeed at performance management instill a value creation mind-set throughout the business. Their employees at all levels understand the principle of value thinking, know why it matters, and make
decisions in the context of the impact on value. They achieve this because
their top managers consistently reinforce the importance of the value mindset in all their communications, build the capabilities to understand value
creation, and (as discussed later) link value creation to the reward process.
Often, managing value is mistakenly viewed as the responsibility of a
small group of managers. Typically this group includes the CEO, the
board, and those in the finance function charged with ensuring that performance reports are appropriately designed and completed in a timely
manner, and that any deviations showing up in the performance metrics
against targets are identified and explained. This finance group is usually
distinct from the business managers in charge of the day-to-day operations. Consequently, there is often a gap in accountability and limited understanding of how day-to-day decisions affect value.
When designing the performance management system, successful organizations bridge this gap by investing time in two-way discussions that include the business managers in the system’s development. Also, they
physically break down the barrier between the finance team and the line
managers. Many organizations have no dedicated finance career track beyond the roles requiring technical skills such as tax law and accounting. Instead, they move personnel between operating the business and running
the planning and performance management, so they can learn how business decisions affect value.
Companies instill the value mind-set when the top management team
models that mind-set in each interaction. It is important that employees see
executives walk the talk. Companies where top management pulls back on
advertising expenditures to hit a quarterly earnings forecast typically have
difficulty building a value mind-set. At companies with strong value mindsets, CEOs take a stock market perspective in many of their interactions.
CEOs use internal and external addresses to instill the importance of shareholder value creation by reminding their colleagues who the investors in
their company really are. In a recent speech Lord Browne, the CEO of
British Petroleum, said:
Successful business creates wealth for many different people. We take
our shareholders’ money, put it to work applying skills and technology, and we create additional wealth for them. The money invested
doesn’t come from . . . the sort of capitalists who always used to
be drawn in cartoons wearing tall black hats. It comes from ordinary savers—directly and through investment funds. Most of our

420

PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

investors . . . are individuals and families saving for their retirement.
They depend on the investments they make with us, and that is a considerable responsibility. . . . The role of business in society is to take
people’s savings, to use them productively and to add to the wealth
with which we have been entrusted.2

VALUE DRIVERS AND VALUE METRICS
A value mind-set centers on understanding the company’s value drivers. A
value driver is an action that affects business performance in the short or
long term and thereby creates value. Value drivers include increasing the
number of stores for a supermarket chain, reducing the levels of working
capital for a consumer goods company, and building employee loyalty in a
software company. They also include more strategic actions, such as merging divisions with those of a competitor to remove excess capacity or offshoring activities to a lower-cost country such as India.
To measure how well the business is performing in relation to these value
drivers, companies use a mix of value metrics and value milestones. Value metrics measure quantitatively how well the business is doing in terms of a value
driver; for example, percentage addition of new space is a metric for growth of
new stores. For some value drivers (particularly those that are more strategic),
it is hard to identify specific metrics, so the company uses value milestones
instead. These measure how well the business is doing on the activities related to the value driver. In a mature commodity materials manufacturing industry, a significant value driver is consolidating businesses with competitors
to remove excess capacity (without the consolidation, none of the players have
an incentive to remove capacity). To measure progress on this value driver, a
company might use milestones in an acquisition program, such as approaching potential partners, getting approval from antitrust authorities, and closing the transaction. Finally, the top 10 to 15 value metrics and value
milestones that matter for the business, given its strategy and industry, are
called the company’s key performance indicators (KPIs).
As we saw in Chapter 13, the primary elements of historical performance are growth and return on capital, but measuring historical growth
and return on capital does not tell us about the potential for future growth
and return on capital—the business’s health. These historical measures also
do not tell managers what to do to improve growth and return on capital.
Therefore, in this chapter, we take the concept of measures to a deeper level,
discussing how effective performance management requires an understanding of the underlying drivers of value and how these can be used by a
management team to provide focus on how and where they can create value.
2

The Botwinick Lecture, Columbia Business School, November 2004.

VALUE DRIVERS AND VALUE METRICS

421

What Are the Value Drivers?
Value depends on performance in both the short term and the long term, so
the value drivers must include those related to short-term performance
and those related to the long-term health of the business. Thus, applying
appropriate cost controls to manage short-term earnings and cash flow are
normally part of a company’s value drivers. The company must also identify
what will drive longer-term value, so managers do not cut short-term costs
at the expense of, say, product development or maintenance of a manufacturing plant’s physical assets.
The relative importance of different value drivers in a particular business depends on its fundamental microeconomics. Improving customer
loyalty matters much more in branded consumer goods than it does in
commodity chemicals, where costs and production uptime have a disproportionate impact on value.
The importance of different value drivers also depends on strategy;
even in the same industry, two companies might have different value drivers. In retail, some companies such as Wal-Mart compete on price, and
some such as 7-Eleven compete on convenience. For companies that compete
on price, managing the supply chain’s cost effectiveness is much more important than it is for companies that compete on convenience, because an efficient supply chain allows the retailer to attract customers through low
prices. In contrast, managing the supply chain to improve product availability (number of products in stock) in stores is a much bigger value driver for
retailers that compete on convenience. Customers looking for convenience
need to have the product available when they visit the store.
Clarity about what the business’s value drivers are and how each driver
affects value has several advantages. First, if managers know the value drivers, they can make explicit choices requiring a trade-off between pursuing
one value driver and allowing performance against another to deteriorate.
This is particularly true for trade-offs between the delivery of short-term
performance and the activities that build the long-term health of the business to sustain future performance. These trade-offs are real. Increasing investment for the long term will cause short-term returns to decline, as
management expenses some of the costs such as R&D or advertising in the
year they occur, not in the year the investments achieve their benefits. Other
costs are capitalized but will not earn a return before the project is commissioned, so they will suppress overall returns in the short term.
Another benefit of clarity about value drivers is that it enables the management team to assign priorities to actions so that activities expected to
create substantially more value take precedence over others. Setting priorities encourages focus that often adds more to value than efforts to improve
on multiple dimensions simultaneously. Without an explicit discussion of
priorities and trade-offs, different members of the management team could

422

PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

interpret and execute the business strategy in numerous ways. Distinctive
planning and performance management systems promote a common language—the value-driver approach—that shapes the way top management
and employees think about creating value at each level of the organization.
For example, in a pharmaceutical company setting such an approach would
encourage discussion and coordinated action across the organization
regarding specific steps to increase the speed of product launches in order
to accelerate value creation.

Developing Value Drivers and Value Metrics
Some companies develop their value drivers and metrics in a two-step process. First, they develop an understanding of the economic links within the
business and identify potential value drivers. Second, they identify which
value drivers have the highest priority because they have the most potential
to create value.

Step 1: Understand economic links in the business, and identify potential
value drivers The core activity of this first phase is to develop value trees
for a business unit. The value tree is a systematic method of analytically and
visually linking the business’s operational metrics to financial metrics and
shareholder value. Each element of financial performance is broken down
into operational metrics. Value drivers are associated with each of these metrics. Exhibit 14.1 shows a simple value tree for a manufacturing company.
Managers should develop different initial versions of trees based on
different hypotheses and business knowledge in order to stimulate identification of unconventional sources of value. The information from these versions
should then be integrated into one tree (or in some cases, a few trees) that best
reflects the understanding of the business. Managers should develop separate
trees for different parts of a business unit if the parts are clearly different (for
example a unit that includes a retail business and wholesale trading).
We illustrate this process by applying it to a temporary-help company.
Exhibit 14.2 on page 424 shows four different approaches used to develop a
value tree for this company. A tree based on profit-and-loss structure often
seems to managers to be the most natural and easiest to complete. Such a
tree, however, is unlikely to provide the insight gained by looking at the
business from a customer’s perspective, or from that of a branch or other
relevant vantage point. Exhibit 14.3 on page 425 is a summary value tree. To
create it, management has adopted the most useful insights provided by
other trees, a process that forms the basis for further development.
When you develop value trees, pay particular attention to growth value
drivers. Initiatives in the different growth horizons pay off over different time
periods. Yet the timing of the payoffs has little to do with those points in time
when management must nurture the opportunity with attention and invest-

VALUE DRIVERS AND VALUE METRICS

423

Exhibit 14.1 Simple Value Driver Tree: Manufacturing Company

Revenues
per unit

Sales force
effectiveness
Product
quality
Market
share

Value

Growth

Volume

ROIC

Manufacturing
cost per unit

WACC

SGA cost
per unit

Invested capital
per unit

New product
pipeline
Market
growth

Labor hours
per unit

Manufacturing
error rate

Unit labor
cost

Raw materials
cost per unit

ment in order to bring it to fruition. Continuing the example of the temporaryhelp company, Exhibit 14.4 on page 426 illustrates a value tree created for developing business in a new geographic market. Important value drivers
included developing the market and staff capabilities in the new country.

Step 2: Identify highest-priority value drivers Every tip of a value tree is a
potential value driver, so a full disaggregation would result in a large number of value drivers, certainly more than management could feasibly focus
on. As a result, the second step after creating the value trees is to ask questions to filter out the business’s key value drivers:
1. Is the value driver material? The simplest way to test this is to estimate
the sensitivities of the value driver by changing the appropriate metric in the value tree; for example, a 1 percent increase in the shipping
costs increases the overall logistics cost of a business by x percent.
However, it is not easy to represent some inputs to a value tree by
arithmetic formulas, such as the relationship between advertising
spending in a beer business and value in a certain niche consumer
brand channel. In this case, testing whether advertising expense is a

424

Value

Customer value tree

Value

Traditional “P&L tree”

Number of
customers

Economic
profit per
customer

Growth

ROIC

Margin per
contract staff

Customer acquisition
cost (capital and operating)

Number of
staff per
customer

Capital

Costs

Revenue

Upselling
margin

Basic
margin
Value

Market segment tree

Value

Branch value tree

Exhibit 14.2 Value Trees from Four Perspectives: Temporary-Help Company

Economic profit in
“custom” segment

Economic profit
in “mass” segment

Number of
branches

Economic
profit per
branch

Average margin (including
capital charge)

Market share

Size of segment

Capital charge
per branch

Utilization
percent

Margin/staff
member

Number of
contract staff
per branch

VALUE DRIVERS AND VALUE METRICS

425

Exhibit 14.3 Summary Short-Term Value Tree: Temporary-Help Company
Basic
revenue

Economic
profit per
branch

Margin per
contract staff

Add-on
revenue/
upselling

Operating
profit per
customer

Number of
staff per
customer

Direct cost

Number of
customers
per branch

Customer
acquisition
cost

Branch
capital
charge

Value

Number of
branches

Total industry
number of
branches
Share of
branches

material driver of value depends on thoroughly understanding the
effectiveness of marketing expenses in the beer industry. The inputoutput relationship would be constructed using research on past
marketing, experience of the business managers, and historical
“bang for the buck” analysis.
2. How much impact can the business have on the value driver? This second
filter assesses the extent to which the business can stimulate and affect change. To prioritize the value drivers, managers have to estimate
how much they can affect each one and then use the value tree to understand the relative impact on value. Several considerations are helpful for assessing the business’s possible impact on each value driver:
• Does the external environment allow change? For example, growing the number of stores is not meaningful as a key value driver for
a retail business if planning authorities are unlikely to grant permission for further store expansion.
• Do the current business assets offer room for improvement? If the
current reliability of the company’s manufacturing plants is already
near the technical limits for a process or a best-in-class industry

426

PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

Exhibit 14.4 Summary Medium-Term Value Tree:
Temporary-Help Company, New Geographic Market
= Key value drivers

Number of initial
prospects identified

Prospective
clients

Percent annual growth

Assignments
per prospect
per year
Potential
revenues

Initial percent
Prospect to
client ratio
Increase per year

Initial percent
Revenue per
assignment

Value

Increase per year

Revenue to
employment
cost ratio

Staffing
pool cost
development

Number of
prospective
contract staff
members
Prospective
client to
prospective
contract staff
member skill
match

Current percent

Improvement per year

Utilization

benchmark, the potential for further improvement is likely to be
small. In that case, improving reliability is less likely to be a key
value driver.
• Do the existing skill set and capabilities offer the appropriate
foundation for change? It is very well coming up with a set of

VALUE DRIVERS AND VALUE METRICS

427

value drivers, but if the business lacks the necessary human resources to apply them, then management should focus first on developing capabilities as a precursor to value creation.
3. Have unintended consequences been considered? Focusing too much on one
value driver will often have unintended consequences; for example,
performance against other value drivers could slip. One manufacturing company focused on improving factory availability (the proportion
of the time the plant was able to produce) as the main value driver.
During a high-margin period, its marginal production generated significant economic returns. However, unintended consequences included excessive maintenance, overinvestment to build redundancy,
and an overstocking of replacement parts. When margins returned to
a more normal level, these consequences drained profitability. A better alternative is to develop a balanced set of value drivers that manage for unintended consequences. For the manufacturing company,
improving availability had to be supplemented with managing maintenance effectiveness.
4. Is the value driver sustainable? Value drivers that deliver value once
(e.g., delivering one-time cost synergies from integrating a newly acquired business unit) should be distinguished from those that consistently create value for the business. Technology leadership over
competitors cannot be a key value driver for a manufacturing business if there is no patent protection and much competition.
By answering these questions, management should rank the 10 to 15
value drivers that really matter at different levels of the business and identify the appropriate value metrics. Ideally, these value drivers cascade
through the organization. The CEO might focus on overall productivity,
and the shift managers would focus on productivity of particular units during their shift.
Applying this process to an example, Exhibit 14.5 on page 428 illustrates
the key value drivers and metrics for a pharmaceutical company. The exhibit shows the key value metrics, the company’s current performance relative to best and worst in class, its aspirations for each driver, and the
potential value impact from meeting its targets. The greatest value creation
would come from three areas: accelerating the rate of release of new products from 0.5 to 0.8 per year, reducing from six years to four the time it
takes for a new drug to reach 80 percent of peak sales, and cutting cost of
goods sold from 26 percent to 23 percent of sales. Some of the value drivers
(such as new-drug development) are long term, whereas others (such as reducing COGS) have a shorter term focus.
A well-defined and appropriately selected set of key value drivers
ought to allow management to articulate how the organization’s strategy

428
14
7

25%

50%

35%

6%

— Time to market in years

— Time to 80 percent of peak sales in years

• Market share in high value segments, such as
share of sales of major products in U.S.

Efficiency/effectiveness
• Research and development effectiveness, such as
product tail
— Sales of non-major products as a percent of
total sales

• Optimizing industrial operations
— Cost of goods sold in percent of sales

• Optimizing marketing and sales and general and
administrative costs, such as general and
administrative expenses as percent of sales

0.1

Worst in
peer group

Top-line growth
• Rate of release of major products, per year
• Optimizing product lifecycle

26%

35%

50%

23%

0.8

25%

4

10

3%

14%

10%

70%

3

9

1.0

Best in
peer group

All arrows represent an equivalent implementation effort

Current position

5%

40%

6

0.5

Performance and targets

Value driver

Exhibit 14.5 Key Value Drivers: Pharmaceutical Company

2.3

4.8

6.3

4.5

11.3

9.8

15.3

Increase in value (€ billion)

EFFECTIVE TARGET SETTING

429

creates value. If it is impossible to represent some component of the strategy
using the key value drivers, or if some key value driver does not serve as a
building block in the strategy, then managers should reexamine the value
trees, the filters, or both.

Disseminating the Value Drivers and Metrics
Although the value driver approach underpins the entire performance management system from longer-term strategic planning to yearly and monthly
performance management, the key value metrics could vary depending on
their purpose. For example, the executive board would focus on financial
and operational metrics associated with overall business performance and
health, and line managers would focus on operational metrics relating to
day-to-day performance, especially monthly performance assessment.
For the company to realize the benefits of clarity on the value drivers
and metrics, managers at all levels must understand them. The process of
developing the value drivers and metrics is therefore as important as the
drivers and metrics themselves. The management team at all levels of the
business must be involved in coming up with the value drivers. A chemicals business engaged its top 30 people in drawing up value trees and testing to determine the most important value drivers. At workshops, the
participants debated the relative importance of the emerging key value
drivers and how they linked to the strategic context for each business unit.
At the start, some managers were skeptical, believing that their collective
business experience would make arriving at the key value drivers an obvious and non-value-adding exercise. However, the discussions yielded
some surprises in the form of material differences in people’s assumed
priorities. Exchanges provided a healthy test of how well management was
aligned and whether it could clearly articulate how to create value in the
business. By the end of the process managers understood their business
much better.

EFFECTIVE TARGET SETTING
The third key element of effective performance management is setting targets that are challenging but realistic enough to be “owned” by the managers responsible for meeting them. We focus on target setting for a business
unit, but the ideas apply at all levels of a company. The process should ensure
that targets do not appear theoretical and unrealistic to those who are supposed to deliver the performance required to meet them. It also helps to
make sure the organization views the targets as a set of aspirations embraced by the entire management team (albeit with challenges from above
and from peers), rather than as something simply imposed by others.

430

PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

Aligning top-down and bottom-up targets requires negotiation between
the corporate center and business units. The process is iterative, and its
most important prerequisite is a well-informed corporate center. Top management, particularly the CEO, must understand the economics and operating environment of each business, independent of information that the
business provides.
Targets should be based on actual opportunities for improvement associated with the key value drivers and the underlying economics of the
business unit. Companies can identify opportunities by benchmarking
performance on a particular value metric or milestone based on the following considerations:
• Fundamental economic analysis: This involves estimating the potential
for revenue growth and ROIC based on the product market and competitive environment. The company might estimate the potential size
of a business’s market and convert that estimate into market share
and revenue targets based on a competitive assessment. ROIC targets
can be based on the competitiveness of the market and the experience
of companies in similar markets.
• External benchmarks: These benchmarks compare the company’s performance on a value driver with similar companies in the same industry.
The analysis can clarify how the company is performing against competitors, including a sense of where it enjoys superior performance
and where it lags. External benchmarks are credible because they are
based on companies actually delivering levels of performance. Companies often benefit from benchmarking themselves against companies in other, similar industries. A petroleum company might
benchmark product availability in its service station shops against a
traditional grocery retailer. External benchmarks may also extend beyond direct competitors. Even if companies’ products and services are
in different sectors, their processes may be similar; if so, they may
have similar value drivers and may benefit from benchmarking. Lean
manufacturing approaches developed by automakers have been successfully transplanted into many other industries, including retailing
and services. For example, measuring the proportion of activities that
require rework can suggest how well one business operates a process
relative to other companies.
• Internal benchmarks: These benchmarks compare the performance of
similar units within the company. They may be less challenging
than external benchmarks, as they do not necessarily involve looking at world-class players. However, internal benchmarks deliver a
number of benefits. The data are likely to be more readily available,
since sharing the information poses no competitive or antitrust

EFFECTIVE TARGET SETTING

431

problems. Also, unearthing the causes of differences in performance is much easier, as the unit heads can visit the benchmark
unit. Finally, these comparisons facilitate peer review, a point that
we explore later.
• Benchmarks against itself: These measures involve analyzing the historical performance of the same business over time on a particular value
metric. If the business can show that it has delivered high performance
with the same management team on the same equipment, it overcomes
the major objection to external benchmarks: that they do not apply to
the particular unit in the company. One company found that its daily
production varied widely. Management ranked the days by production
level, as shown in Exhibit 14.6, demonstrating that the business could
deliver outstanding performance on some days—proof that it was not
impossible. The effort also helped managers understand what actions
they could use to improve daily production (in this case, reducing variation in daily production, rather than eliminating bottlenecks or
adding capacity).
• Theoretical limits: Some processes or activities have physical limits on
their efficiency. For example, with no wastage, a pump might require
18 kilowatt-hours of energy. If it actually uses 25 kilowatt-hours, it is

Exhibit 14.6 Ranking of Performance from Worst Day to Best Day
Daily production
600
Best day

Metric tons per day

500

400

300

80th percentile
performance for
year was 427 tons

Mean performance
for year was 362
tons, median was 377

200

100
Worst day

0
0

25

50
Cumulative percentile

75

100

432

PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

operating at 72 percent of the theoretical limit. Particularly in manufacturing, identifying theoretical limits indicates how far performance
can be improved, that is, the extent to which a value driver can improve efficiency.
To clearly understand and carefully apply these measures, analysis is necessary. Some companies establish a separate analytic group whose role is to
compile this analysis.
Some of the most effective companies supplement the top-down challenge with a challenge from peers running similar businesses. Colleagues
running similar businesses will be familiar with opportunities for improvement, so they will be much more effective than staff managers at
providing challenge. Companies that have excelled at performance management arrange peer challenge not only on overall profitability during the year
but also on the plans for capital expenditure, growth, pricing, and costs. An
additional benefit of this peer challenge is that it can encourage colleagues
to support one another in improving the performance of the business. One of
Canada’s largest privately held companies assigns the strongest performers
to help colleagues who are not performing as well.
When those assigned to meet targets also actively help in setting them,
a company has a chance to generate the understanding and commitment
needed for outstanding performance. Consider the experience of one global
consumer goods company. When the corporate technical manager ordered
that all the company’s bottling lines should achieve 75 percent operating efficiency, regardless of their current level, some plant operators rebelled.
Operators at one U.S. plant, concluding that at 53 percent their plant was
running as well as it had ever run, worked only to maintain performance at
historical levels. However, the plant launched a process permitting the operators to set their own performance goals, and they raised efficiency above
the 75 percent target over a period of only 14 months.
Most performance targets are a single point. However, some companies,
including General Electric, use a process for setting base and stretch targets.
The base target is established from the top down, based on prior-year performance and the competitive environment. The company expects that
managers will meet the base target under any circumstance; those who do
not rarely last long. The stretch target is a statement of the aspiration for the
business and develops from the bottom up. Management creates the operating plan with an aim of meeting the stretch target. Those who meet their
stretch target are rewarded, but those who miss it are seldom punished.
Using base and stretch targets makes a performance management system
much more complex, but it allows the managers of the business units to
communicate what they dream of delivering (and what it would take for
them to achieve that goal) without committing them to delivering the
stretch target.

FACT-BASED PERFORMANCE REVIEWS

433

FACT-BASED PERFORMANCE REVIEWS
Performance reviews should not be anecdotal, but should be based on
measurable facts. Companies should consider using performance and
health scorecards to fuel the conversation between manager and subordinate by clearly showing individual performance. Performance reviews
based on facts keep leaders and managers honest and help make corrective
action effective.

What to Measure
The best information for fact-based reviews is a scorecard incorporating the
key value metrics from the value driver analysis. Managers may be
tempted to think that financial reports alone can serve as the basis for performance discussions. Financial results are only part of the review process,
however. Key value metrics show the operating performance behind the financial results.
The consumer goods company in Exhibit 14.7 illustrates the importance of having a set of key value metrics. For several years, a business unit
showed consistent double-digit growth in economic profit. Since the financial results were consistently strong—in fact, the strongest across all
the business units—corporate managers were pleased and did not ask
many questions of the business unit. One year, the unit’s economic profit
unexpectedly began to decline. Corporate management began digging
deeper into the unit’s results. They discovered that for the preceding
three years the unit had been increasing its economic profit by raising

Exhibit 14.7 Consumer Goods Co.: Profit Growth Disguised
Declining Market Share
Economic profit, year 1 = 100

Market share

200

60

160

50
40

120

30
Profit growth
sustained by
price increases

80
20
40

10
0

0
1

2

3

4
Year

5

6

7

1

2

3

4
Year

5

6

7

434

PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

prices and cutting back on product promotion. That created the conditions
for competitors to take away market share. The unit’s strong short-term
performance was coming at the expense of its long-term health. The company changed the unit’s management team, but lower profits continued
for several years as the unit recovered its position with consumers.
Corporate centers also find it convenient to impose one scorecard on
all business units. This is shortsighted. Although a single scorecard
makes it easier to compare units, management forgoes the chance to
understand each unit’s unique value drivers. Ideally, companies should
have custom-tailored scorecards that cascade through each business, so
that each manager can monitor the key value drivers most important
to him or her.

Problem Solving
Managers should use reviews as problem-solving sessions to determine
the root causes of bad performance. Instead of identifying who is to
blame, managers can use review sessions to fix problems so they do not
recur. Reviewers should be required to prepare thoroughly for reviews
and turn traditionally one-sided discussions (“boss tells, subordinate
does”) into collaborative sessions. Doing so in front of peers brings together a group of individuals with well-informed insights and respected
perspectives. This makes problem solving more effective, increases the
sense of accountability, and virtually eliminates any sandbagging. Orchestrated with care, the review helps motivate frontline managers and
employees, rather than deflating them. One public transport authority
winnows down to a few the issues to debate and invites a select number of
people to the table to resolve them, with minor data questions delegated
to separate channels. Whatever the chosen format, however, this is an area
where the manager or leader has a crucial role in setting the tone of the organization and the level of honesty. Reviewing performance together in a
constructive environment encourages managers to be open and take more
responsibility. But if the manager has a blame mind-set, subversive behavior will follow.
Consider how one chemical company designed a more effective way to
review performance. A year after introducing a VBM approach to make reported data more transparent, the company had yet to see the expected improvements. Worse, nearly everyone in the organization recognized that
official discussions about performance were something of a sham. Some
managers misrepresented reports of their actual performance to create the
appearance of meeting targets; others built enough slack into future performance targets to make sure they would easily be met.
The company’s response: Change the review process. What had been
one-on-one review involving the division head and unit leader became a

ACCOUNTABILITY IN EVALUATION AND REMUNERATION

435

broader discussion between the division head and all unit leaders together. Rather than simply reviewing the data, the meeting focused on the
most important lessons from the previous reporting period, as well as the
greatest risks and opportunities expected in the coming period. Emphasis
in the meeting shifted away from individual successes and failures to
a combination of shared lessons and problem solving on future risks
and opportunities. Next, the company introduced a series of peer meetings among unit leaders without the division heads present. These meetings aimed to review plans and identify risks and opportunities in order
to set priorities for allocating capital and resources. In the first year of
the new processes, capital outlays dropped 25 percent, and underlying
profits, adjusted for the usual modulations of the business cycle, rose by
10 percent.

ACCOUNTABILITY IN EVALUATION AND REMUNERATION
The final element of successful performance management is creating accountability and rewards for individual managers and employees. The rewards are typically financial and, according to some critics, have become
excessive. During the past decade, financial compensation, particularly
stock options, reached new heights. As the long bull market extended into
the late 1990s, executives received extraordinary rewards that had little to
do with their own performance and everything to do with factors beyond
their reach, such as declining interest rates. When the stock market fell,
companies maintained the higher level of rewards.
Many have argued that current compensation systems are broken because they rarely link compensation to the company’s long-term value creation. But development of better approaches will take years, and the nature
of these changes is unclear. In the meantime, here are several emerging
ideas on how to better align incentives and value creation:
• Link stock-based compensation to the specific performance of the
company, stripping out broad macro and industry effects.
• Tie some portion of compensation for senior executives to corporate
results several years after the executive’s departure.
• Link bonuses as much to health metrics as to short-term financial results.
• Move away from formulaic compensation to more judgmentbased systems.
In addition to financial rewards, companies motivate their people
through nonfinancial means. One of these is career progression. Another

436

PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT

links to the company’s values and beliefs; employees gain inherent satisfaction from living up to a distinctive “XYZ” way of doing business.

SUMMARY
For many companies, performance management is the most important
driver of value creation. Yet performance management is difficult to describe, let alone execute well. The rewards, however, are great for companies that can build a value creation mind-set, clarify the business’s
short- and long-term value drivers, set stretch targets that people believe
are achievable, conduct fact-based performance reviews, and effectively
motivate their people.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Identify and define the components of an effective performance
management system. How does an effective performance management system differ from early value-based management systems?
2. What is the difference among a value driver, value metric, and milestone? Describe the relationship among milestones, metrics, and
value drivers.
3. What are the advantages/disadvantages of tailored value drivers versus the balance scorecard?
4. Why is it important for a manager to understand a business’s value
drivers and how each driver affects value?
5. Describe the process employed to determine a company’s value
drivers.
6. What is the purpose of creating a value tree analysis? Identify the
critical components and the processes for creating a company’s value
tree diagram.
7. What is the purpose of identifying an appropriate benchmark? Describe two classifications of benchmarks. Present the differences in
how the two classifications of benchmarks are defined and used.

15
Creating Value through
Mergers and Acquisitions

Mergers, divestitures, joint ventures, and other change-of-ownership transactions are important ways for corporations to reallocate resources and execute strategies. At some point in their careers, senior executives can expect
to receive an overture from another company, bid on a business offered for
sale, or debate with colleagues the merits of a deal.
Mergers and acquisitions (M&A) have long been features of the corporate landscape. They first became notorious in the late 1800s in the United
States with the activity of the “robber barons,” followed by the consolidations of J. P. Morgan and others in the early 1900s. Since then, there have
been several waves of M&A activity in the United States—during the booming economy of the late 1960s, in the controversial restructuring wave of the
mid-1980s, and most recently with the megadeals signed during the late
1990s (see Exhibit 15.1 on p. 438).
Mergers and acquisitions have become a global phenomenon. Europe
has seen increased M&A activity, driven by overcapacity and the introduction of a common currency. The M&A market in Japan is also expanding,
fueled by strong competition and local concerns about foreign investors targeting domestic companies. In fact, many deals are now cross-border, with
companies either entering new markets or consolidating industries globally. And for some companies, pursuing acquisitions and divestitures can
become corporate strategy in itself. Private equity shops and other industry
consolidators show that superior M&A capabilities can be translated into
shareholder value.
Today, change-of-ownership transactions are supported and even encouraged by a large infrastructure developed to facilitate such deals, including investment bankers, corporate lawyers, management consultants, accountants,
437

438

CREATING VALUE THROUGH MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

Exhibit 15.1 Waves of Acquisitions Since 1968
Value of worldwide deals announced, $ billion

3,095

2,052

1,247

Non-U.S. target1
U.S. target

44

17

34

73

1968

1973

1978

1983

399

394

1988

1993

1998

2003

1

Not available prior to 1985.
Source: Thomson data, Mergerstat.

public relations firms, deal magazines, and private investigators. Considering that most investment banks did not even have M&A departments in the
late 1970s, the transformation has been remarkable.
In this chapter, we focus on the most common change-of-ownership
transactions, mergers and acquisitions, and specifically how to create value
by acquiring another business. We address the following topics:
• The debate over who benefits from M&A.
• How and when to use M&A as a strategic tool.
• How to measure value creation using a structured framework.
• Methods for estimating and capturing synergies.
• How to pay for an acquisition.
• The need to emphasize value creation over accounting treatment.
• Techniques for being a successful acquirer.

DO SHAREHOLDERS BENEFIT FROM M&A?
Economists, politicians, journalists, and the public constantly debate who
benefits from mergers and acquisitions. A merger can be beneficial for
shareholders but harmful to consumers if it creates a monopolistic position
and higher prices. Alternatively, real improvements in efficiency can lead to
higher quality and less costly products. The economy overall will be more

DO SHAREHOLDERS BENEFIT FROM M&A?

439

vibrant, offer greater opportunities, and create more jobs if resources are
continuously moved to their best uses. These developments, of course, are
of little consolation to the workers who lose their jobs when merged companies reduce excess capacity and eliminate redundant positions.
Although a successful M&A strategy will consider an acquisition’s impact on customers, employees, and the community, this book’s focus is on
how to create and manage value for a company’s shareholders. And creating value through acquisition is tricky. Today’s market for corporate control
is fairly efficient: Easy, good deals are hard to come by, if they exist at all.
Most successful deals result from highly disciplined deal making—and
sometimes just good luck.
Numerous empirical studies have examined whether M&A transactions
create value for shareholders. Based on strong empirical evidence, few question that the typical acquisition creates value for sellers. It is difficult to
argue the contrary when target shareholders receive, on average, 30 percent
premiums over their stock’s pre-announcement market price. For acquirers,
the evidence of value creation is far less conclusive. Empirical studies examining the reaction of capital markets to M&A announcements find that the
value-weighted average deal lowers the acquirer’s stock price between 1
and 3 percent.1 Using a sample of U.S. and European transactions larger
than $500 million between January 1996 and September 1998, our own
analysis found that for half the deals with a statistically significant reaction
in the capital markets, the acquirer’s share price decreases in the 10-day
window around the announcement of the transaction.2 Stock returns following the acquisition are no better. Mark Mitchell and Erik Stafford find
that acquirers underperform comparable companies by 5 percent during the
three years following the acquisitions.3
Although the market frowns on the average deal, many deals do create
value for the bidding company. Therefore, it is important to distinguish
what separates value-creating from value-destroying transactions. Academic research points to three characteristics:
1. Strong operators are more successful. According to empirical research,
acquirers whose earnings and share price grow at a rate above industry average for three years before the acquisition earn statistically
significant positive returns on announcement.4 Another study found
1
Although 1 to 3 percent appears small, this decline in stock price translates to $218 billion in
lost value for companies performing acquisitions between 1980 and 2001. For additional details,
see S. B. Moeller, F. P. Schlingemann, and R. M. Stulz, “Do Shareholders of Acquiring Firms
Gain from Acquisitions?” (NBER working paper no. W9523, Ohio State University, 2003).
2
The analysis included 506 deals in Europe and the United States with available data. Of these,
276 saw statistically significant positive or negative reactions of the buyer’s share price.
3
M. L. Mitchell and E. Stafford, “Managerial Decisions and Long-Term Stock Price Performance,” Journal of Business, 73 (2000): 287–329.
4
R. Morck, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, “Do Managerial Objectives Drive Bad Acquisitions?”
Journal of Finance, 45 (1990): 31– 48.

440

CREATING VALUE THROUGH MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

similar results using the market-to-book ratio as a measure of corporate performance.5
2. Low transaction premiums are better. Researchers have found that acquirers paying a high premium earn negative returns on announcement.6
3. Being the sole bidder helps. Several studies have found that acquirer stock
returns are negatively correlated with the number of bidders; the
more companies attempting to buy the target, the higher the price.7
Overall, the statistical evidence demonstrates that the typical acquisition will not create value for the acquirer. However, the specifics of each
transaction matter more than summary statistics. Is your company a superior operator? Will your company’s superior performance translate to better performance in the target? Even if you are the appropriate owner, will
you overpay during the heat of an auction? There are always outliers in the
statistics, and your deal might be one. We therefore return to the fundamentals: Only a relentless focus on value creation helps to turn the odds in
favor of acquirers.

MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS VERSUS ORGANIC
GROWTH AS STRATEGY
M&A can be a strategy. Rolling up an industry by purchasing several
smaller players and improving the economics by exploiting economies of
scale can generate large economic profits. When NationsBank acquired 31
retail banks in the United States between 1988 and 1997, it rolled out welldocumented best practices across each function that reduced costs at the regional level. During this time period, net income rose an average of 32
percent annually, with shareholder returns near 22 percent per year.
Many other strategic themes rely on M&A to create value. You may
want to enter a market with an innovative product but lack the capabilities
to develop the product fast enough to capture the value. In this situation,
the best way to achieve your goal might be to purchase a small company
with a product already under development. Or if you want to enter a new
geographic market, you might need a local sales force that would take years
to build—but only a few months to acquire.
5

H. Servaes, “Tobin’s Q and the Gains from Takeovers,” Journal of Finance, 46 (1991): 409– 419.
M. L. Sirower, The Synergy Trap (New York: Free Press, 1997); and N. G. Travlos, “Corporate
Takeover Bids, Methods of Payment, and Bidding Firms’ Stock Return,” Journal of Finance, 42
(1987): 943 –963. The result was statistically significant in Sirower but not significant in Travlos.
7
R. Morck, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, “Do Managerial Objectives Drive Bad Acquisitions?”
Journal of Finance, 45 (1990): 31– 48; and D. K. Datta, V. K. Narayanan, and G. E. Pinches, “Factors
Inf luencing Wealth Creation from Mergers and Acquisitions: A Meta-Analysis,” Strategic Management Journal, 13 (1992): 67–84.
6

MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS VERSUS ORGANIC GROWTH AS STRATEGY

441

However, it is important to first ask whether M&A is the right step for
your company. Fundamentally, when purchasing another company, you
purchase the company’s assets—tangible assets such as property and
equipment, and intangible assets such as patents, customer lists, and the
know-how of the employees. Alternatively, you could have invested a similar amount of money to create (or purchase) the same assets internally. Assuming your company has opportunities for this type of organic growth,
internal investments tend to return more money for each invested dollar
than acquisitions of other companies through the capital markets.
To examine the implications of organic versus acquired growth, consider the hypothetical company detailed in Exhibit 15.2. In its current
state, our company has revenues of $20 billion, after-tax operating profits
(NOPLAT) of $1.2 billion, and an ROIC of 20 percent. The company is currently growing at 4 percent annually. Based on discounted cash flows, the
company’s value is $16 billion (we assume 10 percent cost of capital).
Suppose the company decides to grow ( beyond current expectations)
through an internally generated product line extension. The company invests $300 million in the new product line. Since the new investment has
similar profit and growth potential as the existing base, the value of the
company will increase by $500 million, or 3.1 percent above the base case.
Next, consider what will happen if management decides to acquire
another company, rather than create the new product line itself. The third
column in Exhibit 15.2 presents the characteristics of a target company

Exhibit 15.2 Creating Value through Acquisitions Is Hard to Do
$ million, percent
Acquired growth
Increase
No
profits
synergies
by 50%
1,000
1,000
4%
4%

Increase
growth
by 50%
1,000
6%

Revenues
Expected growth

Acquirer
20,000
4%

Organic
growth
1,000
4%

NOPLAT
Invested capital
ROIC

1,200
6,000
20%

60
300
20%

60
300
20%

90
300
30%

60
300
20%

DCF value
Market value
Premium (30%)
Value creation
Value creation/
acquirer value

16,000

800
1
(300)

16,000

500
3.1%

800
(800)
(240)
(240)
(1.5%)

1,300
(800)
(240)
260
1.6%

1,050
(800)
(240)
10
0.1%

1

Initial investment.

442

CREATING VALUE THROUGH MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

performing identically to the acquirer’s internal growth opportunity: The
target’s revenues are $1 billion, its ROIC equals 20 percent, and the target
is expected to grow at 4 percent. The target has a DCF value of $800 million. But since the typical acquisition requires a 30 percent premium, the
price to the acquirer would be $1,040 million. If no value is created beyond
the market’s current expectations, the acquirer overpays, and its value
would drop by 1.5 percent.
If the acquirer’s management can increase the target’s profitability by
50 percent (e.g., by eliminating redundant positions in the two companies)
or increase the target’s growth rate by 50 percent (e.g., through the crossselling of products), the new company would generate higher cash flows
than the two companies on a stand-alone basis. Therefore, the value of the
target would be higher, as detailed in the fourth and fifth columns of Exhibit 15.2. However, because of the 30 percent premium, the majority of new
value is transferred to the target’s shareholders. Thus, whereas organic
growth could have increased value 5 percent, an acquisition enhances value
by only 1.6 percent (with a profit increase) or 0.1 percent (with a growth
rate increase). Even though the acquirer has invested more than $1 billion,
its share price would rise less than 2 percent. So even with optimistic assumptions for synergies, the net value generated by acquiring $1 billion in
revenue is far smaller than the value generated by investing internally.
Note, however, that this hypothetical example assumes that organic
growth is a potential substitute for M&A. As mentioned previously, requirements for speed, limits in acquirer capabilities, or barriers to imitation of
competitor products may make organic growth sometimes impossible or extremely expensive. Nevertheless, the required premiums make it difficult to
create value from an acquisition, so you need a good rationale for investing
shareholder capital in an acquisition—and you need to execute relentlessly
to realize the promised synergies incorporated in the transaction’s price.

A FRAMEWORK FOR CREATING VALUE THROUGH MERGERS
AND ACQUISITIONS
If the market value of the target incorporates the value of its discounted free
cash flows, the required investment (in the form of the acquisition price including premium) will be equal to or higher than the current value of the
stand-alone business. Value creation, therefore, requires increasing the expected free cash flows of the combined entities beyond current expectations.
When evaluating M&A opportunities, we rely on a simple framework to
measure how much value will be created for an acquirer’s shareholders. In
its simplest form, an acquirer’s net value creation equals the target’s value
to the acquirer less the price paid:

CREATING VALUE THROUGH MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

443

Exhibit 15.3 How to Think about Value Creation in M&A
$ million
Value
Intrinsic value
of target
NPV of synergies
Gross value of
acquired assets

900

Price
Market value
of target

800

400

Premium paid

240

1,300

Total price paid

1,040

Value to shareholders of the acquirer:

260

• Value (what you get): The gross value acquired is the intrinsic value of
the target ( based on discounted cash flows) plus the net present
value of the synergies that the business combination will generate.
• Price (what you pay): The acquirer pays the market value of the target
before the deal was announced plus any premium that must be paid.
Exhibit 15.3 applies this framework to a hypothetical transaction. The value
of the target including synergies equals $1.3 billion, while the price paid
equals $1.04 billion. Therefore, the value created by the transaction equals
$260 million.
This framework explicitly models something experienced managers already know: What really drives value creation from M&A is the value of the
synergies versus the required premium (the amount above the current market value the acquirer has to pay). The following subsections examine the
framework’s components in detail.

Market Value versus Intrinsic Value
When using the framework in Exhibit 15.3, you must first analyze whether
the target’s current market value equals its stand-alone intrinsic value. We
too often hear executives rationalize an acquisition by insisting the target
company is “undervalued by the market.” But how often does the intrinsic
value of a company really exceed the market value?
Although market values revert to intrinsic values over longer periods,
we believe that pockets of short-term opportunities can exist. Markets
sometimes overreact to negative news, such as the criminal investigation of
an executive or the failure of a single product in a portfolio of many strong
products. In cyclical industries, assets are often undervalued at the bottom
of the cycle. Managers with good information, analysis, and foresight can
acquire assets when they are cheap compared with their actual economic

444

CREATING VALUE THROUGH MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

potential. Comparing actual market valuations with intrinsic values based
on a “perfect foresight” model, we found companies could more than double shareholder returns (relative to actual returns) if they acquired assets at
the bottom of a cycle and sold at the top.8 Just as informed investors may
profit by timing the market, a strategic buyer may be able to acquire assets
below their intrinsic value.
But since market values can deviate from intrinsic values, management
must also be wary of overvaluation. Consider the stock market bubble during the late 1990s. Companies that merged with or acquired technology,
media, and telecommunications companies saw their share price plummet
when the market reverted to earlier levels. Overpaying when the market is
inflated deserves serious consideration because M&A activity seems to rise
following periods of strong market performance. If (and when) prices are
artificially high, large synergies are necessary to justify an acquisition even
when the target can be purchased without a premium to market value.
In our experience, opportunities to create value by buying low and
selling high are rare and relatively small. To truly create value, the acquiring company must be able to increase the future cash flows of the combined entity.

Value Creation through Synergies
When acquiring another company, you will have to take actions to improve
future cash flows of the combined businesses. These opportunities for improvement are called synergies. For a thorough analysis of synergies, it
helps again to remember the fundamentals of value creation: An increase in
value has to come from better revenue growth, higher margins, more efficient capital utilization, or a lower cost of capital.
The source of synergies depends on the strategies and capabilities of
your company. If your company is the most efficient operator in its industry,
synergies will likely come from improving the target’s return on invested
capital. Similarly, if your strategy is to consolidate a lot of smaller businesses in a niche, you will reduce cost—most likely in purchasing, sales,
and administration—and perhaps reduce the industry capacity overall, increasing the capital efficiency. In these cases, revenue synergies will play a
minor role.
Conversely, if your company’s distribution network is unparalleled, you
can create value by purchasing a smaller company with a superior product
yet limited distribution capabilities. Many large pharmaceutical companies
purchase small, single-product drug companies that have a potential block-

8

T. Koller and M. de Heer, “Valuing Cyclical Companies,” The McKinsey Quarterly, 2 (2000):
62–69.

CREATING VALUE THROUGH MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

445

buster product but lack access to the available product markets. Based on its
superior distribution network, the larger company will not only increase
total absolute sales ( by accessing untapped markets), but also speed up
penetration in current markets.

Paying Dearly to Capture Synergies
To gain control of the target, the acquirer must pay the target’s shareholders
a premium over the current market value (known as the control premium).
Although premiums can vary widely, the average control premiums have
been fairly stable, near 30 percent of the preannouncement price of the target’s equity. For targets pursued by multiple acquirers, the premium rises
dramatically.
In many cases, the required premium meets (or exceeds) the level of
captured synergies. Academic theory points to several reasons why buyers
pay such high prices:
• The winner’s curse: If several companies evaluate a given target, and
all have roughly the same synergies available to them, the one who
most overestimates potential synergies will offer the highest price.
Since the offer price is based on overestimation, and not value creation, the “winner” overpays.9
• The free-rider problem: When an acquirer cannot easily “squeeze out”
minority shareholders after a takeover, shareholders who choose not
to tender will receive ownership in the newly combined business. If
the gross acquired value exceeds the purchase price plus a premium,
these shareholders will receive a higher value than those who tendered at the offer price. Since target shareholders prefer to “free ride”
on the acquirer’s synergies rather than tender at the offer price, nobody has an incentive to tender. To convince target shareholders to
sell, all value creation must be paid to the target’s shareholders.10
• Hubris: The acquirer’s management overestimates its ability to generate and capture synergies.11
Premiums for private deals tend to be smaller, although comprehensive
evidence is difficult to collect due to the lack of publicly available data. In
many private deals, the seller is a corporation that wants to divest a business unit. Since the majority shareholder controls the tender decision, these
deals are not subject to the free-rider problem. Also, private acquisitions
9

K. Rock, “ Why New Issues Are Underpriced,” Journal of Financial Economics, 15 (1986): 187–212.
S. J. Grossman and O. Hart, “Takeover Bids, the Free-Rider Problem, and the Theory of the
Corporation,” Bell Journal of Economics, 11 (1980): 42–64.
11
R. Roll, “The Hubris Hypothesis of Corporate Takeovers,” Journal of Business, 59 (1986):
197–216.
10

446

CREATING VALUE THROUGH MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

often stem from the seller’s desire to get out, rather than the buyer’s desire
for a purchase.
In general, an acquirer will almost always pay a premium over the price
at which the company is traded in the market. That means management
must properly identify, estimate, and capture potential synergies.

ESTIMATING AND CAPTURING SYNERGIES
History teaches us that the word synergy represents either the pipe dreams
of management or the hard-nosed rationale for a deal. Sometimes it is a little of both. Consider the following example: A large health services company paid several billion dollars for a profitable company in a related
industry segment. For the company to create value on the acquisition, the
target’s after-tax earnings would have to more than double, from the current level of $225 million to approximately $500 million. But how would this
happen? Was there enough extra revenue growth or incremental cost savings to make this happen?
In practice, the acquirer was unable to make improvements of this magnitude, so the acquisition resulted in the destruction of significant shareholder value. During the years following the acquisition, the acquirer’s
stock price consistently fell, even while the market rose. For this company,
the estimation of deal benefits became disconnected from reality. Too
often, a visionary CEO’s idea of an industry-transforming deal collides with
the reality of day-to-day business.
In this section, we explain the following elements of synergy estimation:
• Process for estimating cost and revenue synergies
• Level of accuracy to expect from synergy estimates
• Cost and timing of implementation
• Top-down approach to checking your synergies
• Alternative deal structures to consider

Estimating Cost Synergies
Too often, managers estimate cost synergies by simply calculating the difference in financial performance between the bidder and target. Having an
EBITA margin 200 basis points higher than the target, however, will not
necessarily translate into better performance. So how should you go about
estimating cost synergies?
There are two parts to estimating and capturing synergies. First, estimate synergies using an outside-in approach based on publicly available data

ESTIMATING AND CAPTURING SYNERGIES

447

Exhibit 15.4 Sample Framework for Estimating Cost Synergies
Example synergies
Research and
development

• Stopping redundant projects
• Eliminating overlap in research personnel
• Developing new products through transferred technology

Procurement

• Pooled purchasing (higher volume)
• Standardizing products

Manufacturing

• Eliminating overcapacity
• Transferring best operating practices

Sales and
marketing

• Cross-selling of products
• Using common channels
• Transferring of best practices
• Lowering combined marketing budget

Distribution

• Consolidating warehouses and truck routes

Administration

• Exploiting economies of scale in finance/accounting and other back office functions
• Consolidating strategy and leadership functions

and data provided by the target’s management team (through a due diligence request). Second, after the deal is signed, start a bottom-up process together with representatives from both companies to define the actions
needed to capture the synergies. It is helpful to use the company’s business
system as a guide for structuring the work. Exhibit 15.4 shows a generic
business system as an example, identifying synergies related to research
and development, procurement, manufacturing, sales and marketing, distribution, and administration. The analysis should be structured using the
following four steps:
1. Develop an industry-specific business system.
2. Develop a baseline for costs as if the two companies remained independent. Make sure the baseline costs are consistent with the intrinsic valuations.
3. Estimate the synergies for each cost category based on the expertise
of experienced line managers.
4. Compare aggregate improvements with margin and capital efficiency benchmarks to judge whether the estimates are realistic given
industry economics.

448

CREATING VALUE THROUGH MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

An insightful business system will fulfill three criteria. First, it assigns
every cost item of the target and each cost-saving idea to one (and only one)
segment of the business system. This will assure that you examine the entire cost structure of the target without double-counting cost savings. Second, if you believe there will be cost savings in the bidder’s organization,
you must be able to assign these savings to the appropriate segments in the
business system. Last, the business system should be designed such that
each segment has sufficient detail. The analysis will not provide much insight if 90 percent of the cost synergies are labeled “Administration.” In this
case, you should disaggregate the system further into organizational units
such as finance, accounting, treasury, and investor relations.
Once the business system is completed, forecast baseline costs for both
the acquirer and target. The base level of costs equals the costs as if both
companies had continued as stand-alone entities. Only by developing a
solid forecast of expected costs will you be able to distinguish real synergies from stand-alone improvements.
For an accurate estimate of potential cost savings ( beyond the expected
baseline cost development), explicitly tie the financial savings to operational activities in the business. What is the equivalent headcount reduction
of the SG&A cost synergy? What is the resulting revenue per headcount?
How much will distribution costs fall when trucks are fully loaded, rather
than partially loaded? Are revenues sufficient to guarantee fully loaded
trucks? And so on.
When tying cost savings to operational drivers, involve experienced line
managers in the process. An integrated team that includes both financial
analysts and experienced line managers is more likely than a pure finance
team to be accurate. In addition, experienced line managers will often already know details about the target. If so, you will generate insights on capacity, quality issues, and unit sales not easily found in the public domain.
Consider one acquisition, where the head of operations took the lead in
estimating the savings from rationalizing manufacturing capacity, distribution networks, and suppliers.12 His in-depth knowledge about the unusual
manufacturing requirements for a key product line and looming investment
needs at the target’s main plant substantially improved synergy estimates.
In addition, this manager conducted a due diligence interview with the target’s head of operations, learning the target did not have an enterprise resource planning (ERP) system. Each of these facts improved negotiations
and deal structuring (e.g., permitting management to promise that the target’s primary European location would be retained while maintaining flexibility at the target’s primary U.S. facility). Moreover, involving the
operations manager ensured that the company was prepared to act quickly
and decisively to capture synergies following the deal’s closure.
12

This and other examples can also be found in S. A. Christofferson, R. S. McNish, and D. L.
Sias, “ Where Mergers Go Wrong,” McKinsey Quarterly, 2 (2004): 93 –99.

ESTIMATING AND CAPTURING SYNERGIES

449

After you complete the synergy assessment, always compare the aggregate results for the combined companies with industry benchmarks for operating margins and capital efficiency. Ask whether the resulting ROIC and
growth projections make sense given the overall expected economics of the
industry. Only a fully developed integrated income statement and balance
sheet will ensure that synergy estimates are in line with economic reality.
To illustrate the detail required in estimating synergies, Exhibit 15.5
presents the result of an outside-in synergy estimate for a merger in the automotive industry. Overall, the acquirer estimated that the combined entity
could reduce total costs by about 10 percent. However, the relative savings
varied widely by business system category. For example, although procurement costs are the single largest cost for automotive manufacturers, most
companies already have the necessary size to negotiate favorable contracts.
Therefore, savings from procurement were estimated at only 5 percent. In
contrast, research and development reductions were estimated at 33 percent, as the two companies consolidated new-product development, paring
down the number of expected offerings. This reduction also had a follow-on
effect in manufacturing, as product designs would move toward a common
platform, lowering overall manufacturing costs. Finally, while sales and
distribution expenses could be lowered, management decided to preserve
the combined company’s marketing budget.

Exhibit 15.5 Automotive Merger: Estimating Cost Synergies
percent
Cost
structure without
synergies

Cost
structure after
synergies

Savings
percent of
original costs

100%
Overhead

10%
24

Sales, distribution
Marketing

3
0

Manufacturing

Procurement

Research and
development

14

5

33

450

CREATING VALUE THROUGH MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

Estimating Revenue Synergies
Although it is tempting to assume revenues for the newly combined company will equal stand-alone sales plus new cross-selling, the reality is
often quite different. First, the merger often disrupts existing customer
relationships, leading to a loss of business. Also, smart competitors use
mergers as a prime opportunity to recruit star salespeople and product
specialists. Some customers may have used the acquirer and target as dual
sources, so they will move part of their business to another company
(to assure a minimum of two suppliers). Finally, customers who decide
to stay during the merger will not be shy in asking for price and other
concessions that salespeople will be eager to offer for fear of losing the
business.
Make sure to develop estimates of pricing power and market share that
are consistent with market growth and competitive reality. As in the process for cost synergies, calibrate the pro forma assumptions with the realities of the marketplace. One global financial company estimated that an
acquisition would net €1 billion in top-line synergies within the next five
years, including double-digit profit growth in the first year. However, overall market growth was limited, so the only way to achieve these goals was
by increasing market share through lower prices. Actual profit growth was
a mere 2 percent.
Revenue synergies often involve acquiring a specific technology or
product. A large company that uses its established distribution network
to bring a superior product from a small start-up to market within months
instead of years can create tremendous value. Cisco relied on this model
successfully in the late 1990s to grow from a single product line to becoming the key player in Internet equipment. Founded in 1984, the company sold the first network router in 1986 and within three years had
sales of $28 million. Cisco went public in 1990 and began purchasing
related companies, allowing it to enter adjacent segments such as cable
modems, set-top boxes, and wireless network equipment. For most acquisitions, Cisco targeted companies that would benefit from its scale, enabling the combined company to introduce new products faster and
to achieve higher peak sales than the acquired companies could have
achieved independently. In 2004, even after the technology crash, Cisco
had more than $22 billion in revenue and a market capitalization of more
than $100 billion.
When estimating revenue synergies, be explicit about the areas of additional growth ( beyond base case assessments). Revenue synergies will come
from one (or more) of four sources:
1. Increasing each product’s peak sales level
2. Reaching the increased peak sales faster

ESTIMATING AND CAPTURING SYNERGIES

451

3. Extending each product’s life
4. Adding new products (or features) that could not have been developed if the two companies had remained independent
Alternatively, revenue increases could come from higher prices through
reduced competition. In reality, antitrust regulations are in place precisely
to prevent companies from using this lever (which de facto would transfer
value from customers to shareholders). Instead, any increase in price must
be directly attributable to an increase in value to the customer and not to reduced choice.

Evaluating the Quality and Accuracy of Synergy Estimates
The four sources of synergies—higher margins, increased capital efficiency,
higher growth, and lower cost of capital—typically have a rank order of confidence. We find that cost reduction synergies are estimated fairly well, especially when companies acquire a business with similar characteristics.
In Exhibit 15.6, we present the results of 90 acquisitions analyzed by
McKinsey’s Post-Merger Management practice. According to their research,
88 percent of the acquirers were able to capture at least 70 percent of the

Exhibit 15.6 Transaction Success at Capturing Projected Synergies
Amount of
goal achieved
Percent

Number of transactions
N = 90

N = 77
13

>100
33

10
88% of transactions
realized more than
two-thirds of the
projected cost
synergies

17

90–100
23

15
70–90

50–70
30–50
<30

23

4

5
5
3
Cost
synergies

18
Revenue
synergies

Almost half of transactions
realized less than 70% of
the projected revenue
synergies

452

CREATING VALUE THROUGH MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

estimated cost savings.13 Contrast this with the revenue synergies. Just
half of the acquirers realized more than 70 percent of the targeted revenue
synergies. In almost one-quarter of the observed acquisitions, the acquirer
realized less than 30 percent of the targeted revenue synergies.
In our experience, too many managers in low-growth businesses believe
they can create value merely by purchasing a high-growth business. This
is not so; to create a true synergy, the transaction has to enable one or both
of the companies to grow faster than originally expected. In fact, many
companies have difficulty even maintaining the baseline revenue growth
because a portion of the combined company’s customers leave due to uncertainty, demand larger discounts, or simply need a new source now that two
of their suppliers have merged.
Finally, we are skeptical of synergies that stem from a perceived lower
cost of capital. Combining companies may smooth earnings, but since investors can already diversify their own stock portfolios, combining companies will not lower the aggregate risk they face. Optimizing the target’s
capital structure to either reduce taxes or lower financial distress costs may
provide some value but should not be the deciding factor.14

Implementation Costs, Requirements, and Timing
Make no mistake; there are always implementation costs to capture synergies. Some costs are obvious, such as the costs to decommission a plant and
the severance that must be paid to employees. Yet subtle costs, forgotten
even by experienced practitioners, must also be identified and estimated.
Examples include rebranding campaigns when the name of the target is
changed, integration costs for different information technology systems,
and the retraining of employees. Total implementation costs may be equivalent to a full year of synergies or more.
Second, acquirers often make overly optimistic assumptions about how
long it will take to capture synergies. Ensuring a stable supply while closing a plant is more complicated than the acquirer expects, disparate customer lists from multiple sources can be tricky to integrate, examining
thousands of line items in the purchasing database always takes more hours
than estimated, and so on.
Moreover, timing problems are not just about discounted cash flow
(cash today being worth more than cash tomorrow): Bad timing can affect
whether the synergies are captured at all. Our own experience suggests
that synergies not captured within the first full budget year after consolidation may never be captured, as the circumstances are overtaken by subsequent events. Persistent management attention matters.
13
14

See note 12.
In Chapter 17, we discuss the valuation impact of changes in capital structure.

ESTIMATING AND CAPTURING SYNERGIES

453

Neglecting the fixed lifetime of certain synergies can be equally problematic. Many savings, while real, are not perpetual. For example, one
source of cost savings is to eliminate excess capacity. But if the industry is
growing, the excess capacity would eventually be eliminated through natural growth. Thus, incremental savings from capacity reductions are accumulated only during the expected duration of excess capacity.

Checking Your Estimates with a Simple Top-Down Approach
Checking how reasonable a synergy estimate is turns out to be easier than
you think. Just return to the basics: Any real synergy has to show up as an
increase in expected growth, operating margin, or capital efficiency. Assume you are analyzing a potential target with a market value of $800 million. The company has revenue of $1 billion, after-tax operating profits
equal to $60 million (operating margins are 10 percent and the tax rate is 40
percent), and invested capital equal to $300 million. The company’s ROIC
equals 20 percent, and its cost of capital is 10 percent. Assuming the company can maintain a stable return on capital and growth rate, we can use
discounted cash flow and the company’s market value to reverse engineer
its long-term growth rate, which in this case equals 4 percent. Now assume
that a 30 percent premium is required to complete the acquisition (for a
total price of $1.04 billion). How large do the synergies have to be to justify
this premium?
If synergies come primarily from operating improvements to the target,
the simplest way to answer this question is to discount cash flows to find
the necessary combinations of growth and margin that justify the price, and
compare these with the base assumptions.15 The left side of Exhibit 15.7 on
page 454 shows the growth and margin combinations implied by the current valuation and the acquisition price under consideration. You can already see that a 30 percent premium requires significant improvements in
margins and/or growth over the base case.
The right side of Exhibit 15.7 quantifies the required improvements in
growth and operating margins ( both analyses keep the capital intensity
constant for simplicity). Each point on the line represents one combination
of growth and margin improvement of the target that justifies paying a 30
percent premium. If synergies come entirely from margin improvements,
operating margins must increase by 2.4 percentage points to justify the premium. Assuming a 10 percent operating margin in the base case, getting
the value of the premium back therefore requires nearly a 25 percent improvement in operating profit of the target in perpetuity. Alternatively, if
all synergies are revenue synergies, growth has to increase by about 1.9 percent perpetually.
15

This approach can be adapted if synergies show up in the acquirer’s organization as well.

454

CREATING VALUE THROUGH MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

Exhibit 15.7 Implied Performance Improvement in Premium Paid
Required improvements over base case
to justify a 30% premium

Growth and margin implied in
price and valuation
2.0

9

1.8

8

1.6

Increase in growth (percent)

10

Pr
ice

6
5

t
rke
Ma

4

at
30
%

=
lue
va

Growth (percent)

7

3

pr
em
iu
m

0
$8

$1
,0
40

0(

2

=

mi
n)
llio

Base
case

1

(m
ill
i

Each point on the line
represents the necessary
combination of growth
and margin improvements
to justify a 30% premium

1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4

on
)

0.2

0

0.0
9

11

13

15

17

Operating margin (percent)

19

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

Increase in margin (percent)

Assumptions for stand-alone value: $1,000 million revenue, 10% margin, 40% tax rate, $300 million operating invested capital.

Alternatives to Acquisition
Always question whether a full acquisition is required to capture the bulk
of the synergies. Perhaps assets can be combined in a joint venture, or the
two companies might enter into a marketing and distribution alliance.
Joint ventures differ from acquisitions in several ways. First, their creation does not usually require a takeover premium. Second, joint ventures
can focus on individual parts of the business system—the parts where synergies will be greatest. Third, joint ventures can be renegotiated or even
dissolved after a period of time. While the potential reward of a joint venture might be lower, the risks can be lower as well.
Alliances and joint ventures have their downside. The legal arrangements for joint ventures and alliances tend to be more complicated than for
an acquisition, since they need to consider items such as governance, dispute resolution, and exit strategies.
The bottom line: think before you buy. Even if synergies in an alliance
or joint venture are lower than in an outright purchase, the lack of a sizable
premium and ability to unwind the position could make these alternatives
attractive. And do not forget to look inside your organization. Could your
company build the target’s business internally? Maybe there is a way to create the same value without the risk of a large transaction.

HOW TO PAY: CASH VERSUS STOCK

455

HOW TO PAY: CASH VERSUS STOCK
Should you pay in cash or shares? Empirical evidence shows that, on average,
an acquirer’s stock returns surrounding the acquisition announcement are
higher when the acquirer offers cash than when it offers shares. We are hesitant, however, to draw a conclusion solely based on aggregate statistics—
after all, even companies that offer cash can pay too much.
Assuming that your company is not capital constrained, the real issue is
whether the risks and rewards of the deal should be shared with the target’s shareholders. When paying in cash, the acquirer’s shareholders carry
the entire risk of capturing synergies and paying too much. If you exchange
shares, the target’s shareholders assume a portion of the risk.
Exhibit 15.8 outlines the impact on value of paying in cash versus shares
for a hypothetical transaction. Assume that the acquirer and the target have
a market capitalization of $1 billion and $500 million, respectively. The acquirer pays a 30 percent premium for a total price of $650 million. Estimated DCF values after the transaction are calculated under two scenarios:
(1) synergies are $50 million less than the premium paid and (2) synergies
are $50 million higher. (To simplify, we assume that market value equals intrinsic value for both the target and the acquirer.) If the payment is entirely

Exhibit 15.8 Paying with Stock Means Sharing the Risk and Rewards
Value to shareholders after a transaction, $ million

Fair market value
before the deal
• Acquirer:
1,000
• Target:
500
Price paid
650
(30% premium)

Downside
scenario
Synergies = 100

Upside
scenario
Synergies = 200

Consideration
in cash

Acquirer shareholders
Target shareholders
Acquirer value creation (destruction)

950
650
(50)

1,050
650
50

Consideration
in stock

Acquirer shareholders
Target shareholders
Acquirer value creation (destruction)

970
630
(30)

1,030
670
30

456

CREATING VALUE THROUGH MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

cash, the target’s shareholders get $650 million, regardless of whether the
synergies are high enough to justify the premium. These shareholders do
not share in the implementation risk. The acquirer’s shareholders see the
value of their stake increase by $50 million in the upside case and decrease
by the same amount in the downside case. They carry the full risk.
Next, consider a transaction in which shares are exchanged. The target’s
shareholders participate in the implementation risk by virtue of being
shareholders in the new combined entity.16 In the upside case, their payout
from the acquisition increases as synergies increase: They receive $670 million in value as opposed to $650 million. Effectively, even more value has
been transferred from the acquirer’s shareholders to the target’s shareholders. The acquirer’s shareholders are willing to allow this transfer because
they are protected if implementation goes poorly. If the deal destroys value,
the target’s shareholders now get less than before—albeit still at a nice premium, since their portion of the combined company is worth $630 million,
compared with the $500 million market value before the deal.
From this perspective, two key issues should influence your choice
of payment:
1. Whether you think the target and/or your company is overvalued or
undervalued. In a bubble scenario, you will be more inclined to pay
in shares, as everybody will share the burden of the market correction. In such a scenario, develop a perspective on relative overvaluation of the two businesses. If you believe your shares are more
overvalued than the target’s, they are valuable in their own right as
transaction currency.17
2. How confident you are in the overall value creation of the deal. The
more confident you are in the value creation, the more you should be
inclined to pay in cash.
Along with risk sharing, consider the optimal capital structure. Can
your company raise enough cash through a debt offering to pay for the target entirely in cash? Overextending credit lines to acquire a company can
devastate the borrower. One company, an automotive supplier, paid cash for
a string of acquisitions. Synergies did not materialize as originally expected (partially for lack of rigorous execution), and the company ended up
with a debt burden that it could not bear. In the end, the company was
forced to restructure its obligations in bankruptcy.
16
Target shareholders with small stakes can sell their shares in the public market to avoid implementation risk. Inf luential shareholders with large stakes, such as company founders and senior executives, will often agree not to sell shares for a specified period. In this case, they share
the risk of implementation.
17
The signaling effect of a share consideration is similar to that of share issuance. The capital
markets will use this new information (that the shares might be overvalued) when pricing the
shares.

FOCUS ON VALUE CREATION, NOT ACCOUNTING

457

If the capital structure of the combined entity cannot take the debt from
the original acquisition, you need to consider paying partially or fully in
shares, regardless of desired risk sharing.

FOCUS ON VALUE CREATION, NOT ACCOUNTING
Many managers focus on the accretion and dilution of earnings, instead of
value creation. They do so despite numerous studies showing that market
valuation does not depend on an acquisition’s accounting treatment, but on
the estimated value creation from the deal. Therefore, a focus on accounting
measures is dangerous and can easily lead to poor decisions, as described
in Chapter 4.
By 2005, both International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and
U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (U.S. GAAP) eliminated
amortization of goodwill. This change means earnings dilution in acquisitions with goodwill is now smaller than under the old accounting rules.
Consequently, most acquisitions paid with cash will now be accretive, since
a major source of dilution has vanished. In the case of share deals, the deal is
accretive if the acquirer’s price-to-earnings ratio is higher than the target’s.
The new rule creates a new danger zone: acquisitions that are accretive
but value destroying. Consider the hypothetical deal in Exhibit 15.9. You are
evaluating the purchase of a company currently priced in the market at $400
million for $500 million in cash. Your company, the acquirer, is worth $1.6
billion and has a net income of $80 million. For simplicity, assume there are
no synergies from the deal. You decide to finance this deal by raising debt at

Exhibit 15.9 EPS Accretion with Value Destruction

Assumptions
Acquirer
Net income ($ million)
80.0
Shares outstanding (million)
40.0
EPS ($)
2.0
Preannouncement share price ($)
40.0
P/E ($ per share)
20.0
Market value ($ million)
1,600.0
Price paid ($ million)

1

Pre-tax cost of debt at 6 percent, tax rate of 35 percent.

Target
30.0
10.0
3.0
40.0
13.3
400.0
500.0

Impact on EPS
Cash deal
Net income from acquirer
80.0
($ million)
Net income from target
30.0
($ million)
(19.5)
Additional interest1 ($ million)
Net income after acquisition
90.5
($ million)

Stock deal
80.0
30.0
0.0
110.0

Original shares (million)
New shares (million)
Number of shares (million)

40.0
0.0
40.0

40.0
12.5
52.5

EPS before acquisition ($)
EPS accretion ($)
EPS after acquisition ($)

2.0
0.3
2.3

2.0
0.1
2.1

458

CREATING VALUE THROUGH MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

a pretax interest rate of 6 percent. This deal destroys value: You pay $100
million over fair value (remember, no synergies). Even so, next year’s earnings and EPS actually increase because the after-tax earnings from the acquired company ($30 million) exceed the after-tax interest required for the
new debt ($19.5 million). But how can a deal increase earnings yet destroy
value? The answer is simple. The acquirer is borrowing 100 percent of the
deal value using its existing asset base as collateral. In actuality, the acquired business could not sustain this level of debt on a stand-alone basis.
And since the acquirer puts an increased debt burden on the existing shareholders without properly compensating them for the additional risk, value
is destroyed. Only when the ROIC is greater than the target’s stand-alone
cost of capital are shareholders appropriately compensated. In our hypothetical deal, the investment is $500 million, and the after-tax profit is $30
million—a mere 6 percent return on invested capital. While this is above
the after-tax cost of financing the debt of 3.9 percent, it is below the appropriate cost of capital.
Now suppose the same target is acquired through an exchange of
shares. The acquirer would need to issue 12.5 million new shares to provide a 25 percent acquisition premium to the target company’s shareholders.18 After the deal, the combined company would have 52.5 million
shares outstanding and earnings of $110 million. The earnings per share
for the new company rises to $2.10, so the deal is again accretive without
any underlying value creation. The new EPS is merely the weighted average of the individual companies’ EPS, so the increase is a result of mathematics and not indicative of value creation.
Financial markets understand the priority of value creation over accounting results. In a study of 117 transactions larger than $3 billion that
took place in the United States during 1999 and 2000, we found that earnings accretion or dilution resulting from the deal was not a factor in the
market’s reaction (Exhibit 15.10). Regardless of whether the expected EPS
was greater, smaller, or the same two years after the deal, about 41 percent
of the acquirers saw a positive market reaction. Results were fairly robust
for both year 1 and year 2 impact on earnings per share, across different
time periods, and for both risk-adjusted return and raw return. Also, companies that used purchase accounting (which creates goodwill) were just as
likely to see significant positive market returns as companies that used
pooling accounting (which avoids goodwill but is now disallowed under
U.S. GAAP and IFRS).
18
The exchange ratio in this hypothetical deal is 1.25 shares of the acquiring company for one
share of the target company. We assume that the capital market does not penalize the acquirer
and the exchange ratio can be set in relation to the preannouncement share price plus the 25
percent acquisition premium.

HOW TO BE A SUCCESSFUL ACQUIRER

459

Exhibit 15.10 Markets Are Neutral to EPS Impact
EPS impact
in year 2

1 month after announcement
Percent of acquirers with
positive market reactions

n=

1 year after announcement
Percent of acquirers with
positive market reactions

Accretive

41

52

63

Neutral

40

43

23

Dilutive

42

54

31

Average : 41%

Average : 50%

Sample set: 117 transactions greater than $3 billion by U.S. companies between January 1999 and December 2000.
Note: Difference in returns between accretive and dilutive not statistically significant; returns were risk-adjusted using CAPM.
Source: Thomson, analyst reports, Compustat, McKinsey analysis.

HOW TO BE A SUCCESSFUL ACQUIRER
Disciplined acquirers can extract value from mergers and acquisitions. To
become a successful acquirer and create value for the shareholders, you must:
• Earn the right to acquire by having a strong core business.
• Consider only targets for which you can improve future free cash flow.
• Excel in estimating overall value creation.
• Maintain discipline during negotiation.
• Rigorously plan and execute the integration.

Earn the Right to Grow through M&A
Are you strong enough to acquire another company? Before considering a
deal, reflect on whether your company’s operating and financial performance (as measured by competitive benchmarking) makes it a superior
competitor.
Time and again, we see transactions in which a weak player tries to
swallow another weak player in the hope of creating a stronger force in the
market. Although some deals might realize these hopes, studies have
shown that, by and large, you have to be a strong player to create value
from M&A. Remember the proverb: Two dogs do not make a lion.

460

CREATING VALUE THROUGH MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

Focus on Where You Can Have an Impact
Successful acquirers proactively cultivate and continuously screen candidates for a good strategic fit. Conversely, you should not passively react
to investment banking proposals for acquisition candidates. If a banker
approaches you with a company for sale, odds are that the company is
being widely shopped, and you could pay top dollar given the timepressured evaluation and due diligence process—hardly a prescription
for success.
The best approach is to develop a complete database on prospective candidates in areas of strategic interest. Since it may be several years before an
acquisition arises, it is important to update information periodically. A
good candidate database will cast a wide net. Make sure to consider publicly held companies, divisions of companies, privately held companies, and
foreign as well as domestic companies. Once you have built a complete list,
you may find it useful to narrow the universe of candidates by employing a
list of knock-out criteria (a process known as screening). Targets that are
too large, too small, or contain too many unrelated divisions can be eliminated. A key set of criteria should reflect the value-creating mechanism you
envision. If your company is best in class in operations, consider buying underperforming companies that you could turn around. If you have a unique
sales channel, search for companies with great products but a sales force
that requires better management.
Consider General Electric, which acquired a continuous stream of companies in seemingly low-tech areas over the past two decades. Throughout
this growth period, the company’s return on invested capital (excluding
goodwill) in the industrial businesses increased from less than 20 percent
to well over 50 percent. Excluding the growth from acquisition, GE’s internal growth mirrored that of the U.S. GDP. The company’s strategy for value
creation is clear: Find businesses where GE can improve operations to
world class.
A clear understanding of how you plan to increase value enough to
make the acquisition worthwhile will also help you succeed in the next step:
estimating the deal’s value.

Properly Estimate Synergies
Many companies destroy value during the acquisition process because they
are overly optimistic about the potential synergies. To develop a good estimate of the value from a deal, be vigilant in applying the guidelines we outlined earlier: Compare your estimates with outside benchmarks, back out
required synergies to justify premiums, and do not underestimate implementation cost and timing issues.

HOW TO BE A SUCCESSFUL ACQUIRER

461

Be a Disciplined Negotiator
Even when synergies are properly estimated, acquirers too often bid up the
price beyond the limits of realistic synergies and industry economics. It is
all too easy to find a benchmark that justifies a higher price or to bargain
away important nonprice terms that restrict the acquirer’s ability to achieve
potential synergies. Remember the winner’s curse: Your competitors either
dropped out or failed to bid because they could not justify the price. Make
sure to understand why your company is still in the race.
At a minimum, you need to quantify all deal terms that have any influence on potential value creation. A seller might insist on guaranteed employment levels at the hometown manufacturing plant or require lucrative
contracts for key employees. A buyer, in the heat of negotiation, might agree
to guarantee service levels for products that the synergy team assumed
would be discontinued. Or simply, the premium discussed around the table
creeps up over the course of the negotiation. On-the-fly changes can significantly affect value creation for shareholders, and executives should keep
track of the value creation framework diligently as negotiations progress.
It is vitally important that the negotiation team and the financial team
act as one. The value creation framework should be updated daily, and
changes should be well documented. Quantify important items that will
enable the lead negotiator to trade one item versus another. The financial
team should be able to scrutinize draft agreements to flag issues that are at
odds with the initial assumptions about sources of synergies.

Plan and Control the Integration
Although post-merger management is beyond the scope of this book, the
following three themes should guide you through the post-merger integration: Start early, put a strong team in place, and track implementation using
both financial and nonfinancial (operating) benchmarks.

Start the integration process early—before announcement In a recent
study, McKinsey’s Post-Merger Management practice found a direct correlation between the speed of execution and the ability to capture estimated
synergies. Experience shows that synergies not captured quickly may never
be captured. We recommend starting implementation planning in parallel
with the valuation and negotiation process. At the time of announcement,
you should have a clear picture of who will run the integration team, the
merged company’s new organizational structure, and ideally who should
fill the new company’s key positions.
Put a strong integration team in charge The manager of the integration
team should not be a poor performer looking to leave the company. Quite

462

CREATING VALUE THROUGH MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS

the contrary, he or she should be a strong performer, and the assignment
should hold the promise of a continued fast-track career in the combined entity. The team supporting the integration manager should be equally strong
and have good prospects for long-term advancement.

Use nonfinancial benchmarks in tracking implementation Throughout
the implementation phase, from the bottom-up development of an action
plan to dissolution of the integration team, the nonfinancial benchmarks
that you developed to set synergy targets will be critical to track success.
Remember to drill down to significant detail, such as headcount targets by
functional group. A fairly complex database is often necessary to track implementation success and monitor the implementation status of individual
action items. Ensure you have adequate resources for this task.

SUMMARY
Corporate valuation plays a central role during the merger and acquisition
process. A well-done valuation keeps the potential for success in perspective and attaches hard numbers to sometimes vague or smoky ideas. Accounting measures, strategic visions, and gut feelings are of little guidance
in today’s ultracompetitive markets.
The simple framework of market value, intrinsic value, synergies, and
required premiums puts value creation in the proper perspective. You will
need to model the individual entities, the synergies, and the combined entity down to the level of free cash flow. The reward for this hard work is a
clear view of whether the acquisition creates value for your shareholders.
Finally, do not forget that you must control the process. Find your own
targets, starting with a self-analysis that identifies your abilities to create
value. You might even discover that you must first improve your own organization before you earn the right to buy and operate another company. Decide on your maximum price, and stick to it as part of a carefully planned
negotiation strategy. After you complete the transaction, continue to manage the integration process carefully, moving as quickly as possible to capture the synergies that may quickly disappear.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What are the principal lessons to be learned from the analysis of
M&A activity at the announcement of a change?
2. Identify three characteristics that differentiate between value creating and value destroying transactions. Should academic evidence

REVIEW QUESTIONS

463

sway an executive from engaging in a merger or acquisition transaction? Explain.
3. Define organic growth. How does organic growth differ from growth
via merger and acquisition?
4. Define synergy. Describe how synergies might enhance a corporation’s value.
5. Exhibit 15.4 provides a generic business system structure useful for
estimating the value of synergies related to an acquisition or
merger. The construction of a business system structure unique to
and useful for a specific corporation must fulfill three fundamental
criteria. Identify the criteria and explain their importance.
6. Identify five characteristics that should lead to successful corporate
value creation through acquisition and merger activity.
7. Outline the immediate actions management must take when in a
merger integration. Relate these actions to specific sources of value
change.
8. You are trying to decide between paying for an acquisition in cash
or with shares of common stock. What factors should you consider
in selecting your choice of payment?
9. You have just completed a merger with the one firm that can possibly
salvage your R&D efforts for remaining competitive. Your consultants remind you that most firms do not realize their expectations
for value-creating growth. Outline several steps to ensure postmerger integration.
10. Why you should consider a joint venture as opposed to a merger or
acquisition?

16
Creating Value
through Divestitures

As the story of EG Corp. in Chapter 2 illustrated, any value creation program should include periodically and systematically cleaning out your
portfolio of businesses. But the the role divestitures should play in value
creation and the role they typically play in the modern corporation are
often distinctly different.
Divestitures, like mergers and acquisitions, tend to occur in waves. In
the decade following the conglomerate excesses of the 1960s and 1970s,
many companies refocused their portfolios. These divestitures were generally sales to other companies or private buyout firms. During the 1990s,
another wave included many more transactions involving public ownership, such as spin-offs, carve-outs, and tracking stocks (see Exhibit 16.1 on
p. 466).
Evidence shows that divestitures create value for corporations, both in
the short term, around their announcement, and in the long term. Furthermore, companies employing a balanced portfolio approach of both acquisitions and divestitures have outperformed companies that rarely divested.
Despite their potential, divestitures usually occur as a reaction to pressure
from outside the corporation, rather than as a proactive and systematic divestiture program. Executives seem to shy away from divestitures and usually delay them too long. In their view, portfolio expansion is a clearer sign
of success—and easier to manage—than the sale of part of the business

Special thanks to André Annema for coauthoring this chapter, and to Lee Dranikoff and Antoon Schneider, whose work on divestitures forms a core part of this chapter.

465

466

CREATING VALUE THROUGH DIVESTITURES

Exhibit 16.1 Divestiture Volume versus M&A Volume
$ billion
Divestitures1

Mergers and acquisitions2
2,300

Public ownership transactions
Other divestitures (e.g., asset sales)
1,588
1,301

1,195

899
717

706
564

322

578

418 398

511
395

148 117110 176 196
1990

1992

1994

345
189 153

1996

1998

2000

510 529

503

2002

1990

123 125

1992

223

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

1
Divestitures with deal value above $50 million.
2

Deals involving U.S. or European target and/or acquirer.
Transactions with deal value above $50 million, excluding divestitures, spin-offs, buy-outs, and share repurchases. Deals involving U.S. or
European target and/or acquirer.
Source: Securities Data Company, McKinsey analysis.

portfolio, especially of profitable businesses. Developing an active portfolio
approach requires many companies to adopt a novel set of values in which
all businesses will most likely be considered for divestiture at some point in
their life cycle.
In this chapter, we apply an active portfolio approach to decisions about
divestitures. We begin by reviewing the evidence that divestitures can create value for a corporation. Then we answer three basic questions:
1. Why does an active approach to divestitures create value?
2. What is an effective approach to making decisions about divestitures?
3. How should management choose the specific transaction type for a
divestiture?

VALUE CREATION FROM DIVESTITURES
Divestitures create value for corporations, both in the short term and over
the long term. Executives should focus on the potential for value creation
and not refrain from divesting assets out of concern for issues related to
size or earnings dilution.

VALUE CREATION FROM DIVESTITURES

467

Exhibit 16.2 Market-Adjusted Announcement Returns of Divestitures1
Mean
Median
Number of
transactions

All
3.0%
1.8%

Spin-offs
4.5%
3.6%

Carve-outs
2.3%
0.9%

Asset sales
2.6%
1.6%

370

106

125

139

1

Cumulative abnormal returns measured from one day before to one day after announcement.
Source: J. H. Mulherin and A. L. Boone, "Comparing Acquisitions and Divestitures," Journal of Corporate Finance, Number 6 (2000): 117–139.

Academic research provides abundant evidence for divestitures’ potential to create value.1 A study of 370 private and public companies2 found significant positive excess returns around the announcement of different
types of divestitures (see Exhibit 16.2). Most of the companies the researchers studied were reactive in their use of divestitures, waiting until
they had to respond to economic, technological, or regulatory shocks. In
August 2004, Agfa-Gevaert announced that it was selling its consumer film
and photo labs division to focus on its more profitable activities in medical
imaging and graphic arts. The increased popularity of digital cameras had
caused a decline in sales of traditional rolls of film. The photo activities had
been the company’s original business, and according to the CEO, “divesting
them was not an easy decision, but with changing market conditions you
have to make a choice.”
Most research looking at divestitures’ impact on value has focused on
the short term. But what about the impact over a longer term? A study of
200 large U.S. companies from 1990 to 2000 showed that companies with a
passive portfolio approach—those that did not sell businesses or only sold
poor businesses under pressure—underperformed companies with an active portfolio approach.3 The best performers systematically divested as
well as acquired companies (see Exhibit 16.3 on p. 468).

1
See, for example, J. Miles and J. Rosenfeld, “The Effect of Voluntary Spin-Off Announcements on
Shareholder Wealth,” Journal of Finance, 38 (1983): 1597–1606; K. Schipper and A. Smith, “A Comparison of Equity Carve-Outs and Seasoned Equity Offerings: Share Price Effects and Corporate
Restructuring,” Journal of Financial Economics, 15 (1986): 153 –186; K. Schipper and A. Smith, “Effects of Recontracting on Shareholder Wealth: The Case of Voluntary Spin-Offs,” Journal of Financial Economics 12 (1983): 437– 468; J. Allen and J. McConnell, “Equity Carve-Outs and Managerial
Discretion,” Journal of Finance, 53 (1998): 163 –186; and R. Michaely and W. Shaw, “The Choice of
Going Public: Spin-Offs vs. Carve-Outs,” Financial Management, 24 (1995): 5 –21.
2
J. Mulherin and A. Boone, “Comparing Acquisitions and Divestitures,” Journal of Corporate Finance, 6 (2000): 117–139.
3
J. Brandimarte, W. Fallon, and R. McNish, “Trading the Corporate Portfolio,” McKinsey on Finance (Fall 2001): 1–5.

468

CREATING VALUE THROUGH DIVESTITURES

Exhibit 16.3 Active Portfolio Strategies Create More Value
Value of $100 invested from January 1990 to December 1999
$519
$442
$392
$353

Passive

Divester

Acquirer

Balanced

Active portfolios
Source: J. Brandimarte, W. Fallon, and R. McNish, “Trading the Corporate Portfolio,” McKinsey on Finance (Fall 2001): 1–5.

General Dynamics, a U.S. defense company, provides an interesting example of an active portfolio approach that created considerable value. In the
beginning of the 1990s, General Dynamics faced an unattractive industry
environment. According to forecasts at that time, U.S. defense spending
would be cut significantly, and General Dynamics—a broad and varied producer of weapons systems—was expected to be affected severely. When
CEO William A. Anders took control in 1991, he initiated a series of divestitures. Revenues were halved in a period of two years, but shareholder returns were extraordinary: an annualized rate of 58 percent between 1991
and 1995, more than double the shareholder returns of General Dynamics’
major peers. Then, beginning in 1995, Anders began acquiring companies
in attractive subsectors. Over the next seven years, General Dynamics’ annualized return exceeded 20 percent, again more than double the typical returns in the sector.
In contrast, most managers seem to shy away from divestitures. The research mentioned earlier on 200 U.S. companies found a clear bias against
divestitures. Almost 60 percent of the companies executed two or fewer divestitures over the 10-year period. Furthermore, according to an analysis
of a random subsample of divestitures, at least 75 percent of the transactions were a reactive move under some form of pressure, due to underperformance of the corporate parent, the business unit, or both. In addition,
the majority of reactive deals occurred only after the business had
been underperforming for many years. Because underperformance is
transparent to the market, investors exert continuous pressure on the cor-

VALUE CREATION FROM DIVESTITURES

469

Exhibit 16.4 Earnings Dilution through Portfolio Management

Company
Operating value
2,500
Cash
–
Enterprise value
2,500
Debt
(600)
Market value of equity
1,900
Shares outstanding
Share price

100
19.0

EBIT
Interest income (2%)
Interest expenses (6%)
Pre-tax income
Taxes (35%)
Net income

266.8
–
(36.0)
230.8
(80.8)
150.0

Earnings per share
Price-earnings ratio

1.50
12.7

Divested
business
unit
400

55.0
–
–
55.0
(19.3)
35.8

Hold cash
2,100
500
2,600
(600)
2,000

Use of proceeds
Debt repayment
Share buyback
2,100
2,100
–
–
2,100
2,100
(100)
(600)
2,000
1,500

100
20.0

100
20.0

75
20.0

211.8
10.0
(36 0)
185.8
(65.0)
120.8

211.8
–
(6.0)
205.8
(72.0)
133.8

211.8
–
(36.0)
175.8
(61.5)
114.3

1.21
16.6

1.34
15.0

1.52
13.1

poration to divest. In an analysis of voluntary asset sales,4 companies that
decided to sell assets tended to be poor performers and were highly leveraged, suggesting that most voluntary asset sales are reactive and not
part of proactive divestiture programs. Other researchers5 have confirmed
this view of parent companies holding on to underperforming businesses
too long.
In our experience, many managers dislike divestitures because these
transactions dilute corporate earnings. However, if another party is willing
to pay more for the subsidiary than the value the parent company expects to
extract, the divestiture will create value and should be pursued. Although
earnings per share may fall, the company’s price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio
will rise. The example in Exhibit 16.4 illustrates this. The company described in the left two columns receives an offer to sell a mature business
for $500 million in cash. In the hands of the parent company, the value of the

4

L. Lang, A. Poulsen, and R. Stulz, “Asset Sales, Firm Performance, and the Agency Costs of
Managerial Discretion,” Journal of Financial Economics, 37 (1994): 3 –37.
5
D. Ravenscraft and F. Scherer, “Mergers, Sell-Offs, and Economic Efficiency,” (The Brookings
Institution, 1987), p. 167; and M. Cho and M. Cohen, “The Economic Causes and Consequences
of Corporate Divestiture,” Managerial and Decision Economics, 18 (1997): 367–374.

470

CREATING VALUE THROUGH DIVESTITURES

business is estimated to be $400 million. Such a divestiture creates value,
no matter how the parent company uses the proceeds:
• If the parent company simply holds on to the proceeds, it will dilute
its earnings per share. The reason is straightforward: The interest
rate earned on the cash is lower than the earnings yield (earnings relative to value) of the divested business unit. In other words, the interest income earned is lower than the forgone earnings of the
business unit. This is just simple mathematics. However, the equity
value increases, and the company’s P/E ratio is higher than before.
• If the company uses the proceeds to repay some debt instead, earnings per share will still be lower than before the divestiture if the interest rate on the debt is lower than the earnings yield of the divested
business. Dilution is less than in the scenario of holding on to the
proceeds because the interest rate on the debt is usually higher than
the investment yield on the cash holdings.
• The company can also use the proceeds to buy back shares. If the
ratio of sales proceeds to earnings of the divested business unit is
lower than the P/E ratio of the remaining business, the divestiture
will dilute earnings per share after the share buyback has occurred:
The relative change in earnings is less than the relative change in the
number of shares outstanding. Because divested units are typically
the most mature businesses in a company’s portfolio, divestitures
often lead to earnings dilution. But as the example shows, a divestiture followed by a share buyback can also increase earnings per
share if the proceeds are high enough.
Against this background, it is perhaps not surprising that a change in
corporate leadership seems to be one of the key triggers for divestitures.
Among the previously mentioned 200 companies we researched, about half
of their major divestitures (those reported on the front page of the Wall
Street Journal) took place in companies where the chief executive officer had
a fairly early tenure.

WHY DIVESTITURES CREATE VALUE
In short, divestitures create value when the business unit is worth more to
some other owner or in some other ownership structure. Business units can
be worth more in another ownership structure because the current structure
may impose unique costs on the parent and/or the business unit. Some of
these costs can be hidden, such as when the parent company culture is dominated by a mature business and limits innovation. In other cases the costs
can be more explicit, for example when a company lacks core skills to be an

WHY DIVESTITURES CREATE VALUE

471

effective operator in an industry. An active portfolio management approach
creates value by avoiding, eliminating, or at least minimizing these costs.
Although divesting underperforming businesses avoids the direct costs
of bearing the deteriorating results, divesting profitable and/or growing
businesses can also benefit both the parent and the business unit. In these situations, a divestiture may create value because the subsidiary will become
more competitive, due to increased freedom for tailored financing and investment decisions, improved management incentives, or better focus. Divestitures also may create value by taking advantage of information
asymmetry when fully informed executives take advantage of imperfectly informed investors or financial/strategic buyers. This is a more tactical rationale and may work only in limited situations.
Because of these potential benefits, companies should regularly divest
businesses—even good, healthy ones—so the corporation can grow stronger
and the remaining businesses can reach their full potential. This means that
divestitures could include companies at different stages of their life cycle.
The divested business unit may very well be a profitable, cash-generating
business or a business with relatively high growth potential. The costs of
holding on to supposedly healthy businesses can in many cases far outweigh
the benefits. Consider what some of these costs might be.

Costs to the Parent
Well-established, mature businesses provide a company with stability and
cash flows. But this stability can be a mixed blessing, since holding on to a
mature business can strap the parent with substantial costs. Quite often,
these costs are hidden and may not seem to be pressing.
The hidden costs take several forms. As a business unit matures, its culture may become incompatible with the culture that the parent company
wants to create, hindering the rest of the group’s efforts for change. Stable
units can also remove the impetus to innovate, resulting in incremental
changes rather than substantial improvements. Because the mature units
typically are relatively large, scarce management time is often diverted into
operating a business unit that is not really part of the company’s future. The
relative impact of management time spent may also differ. If management
time spent on new, high-growth initiatives creates relatively more value
than spending that same amount of time on a lower-performing mature
business, the company would benefit from divesting the mature business.
In 1999, Pactiv—a producer of specialty packaging products—sold its
aluminum business, despite the business’s strong cash flow. According to
management, the aluminum business was using resources and management time that could have been better used elsewhere. In addition, the cyclical nature of the aluminum business made the company more difficult for
investors to understand. Alternately, mismatched business units can lead

472

CREATING VALUE THROUGH DIVESTITURES

to suboptimal decision-making because of conflicts of interest and crosssubsidization. During the early 1990s, Lucent—at that time a business unit
of AT&T and a successful maker of telecom equipment—was selling its
products to many of AT&T’s competitors. To avoid conflict and ease possible customer concerns, AT&T arranged to spin off Lucent in 1996.

Costs to the Unit
A second class of costs includes those that affect the business unit. These
costs relate to a poor fit between the parent company and the business unit
during the unit’s life cycle. The life cycle of a business consists of three different phases:
1. Start-up: Establishing a viable business
2. Expansion: Enabling growth of the business
3. Maturity: Driving efficiency and rationalizing industry structure
At each phase in a business unit’s life cycle, the business requires a different type of parent company.
In particular, as a business moves through the phases of its life cycle,
the critical skills to manage it successfully will change—from innovationfocused skills in the start-up phase to cost management skills in the maturity phase. Many corporations lack the full breadth and depth of skill and
have only two or three world-class capabilities. These core capabilities tend
to be relatively static over time, so the parent company’s skills can become
obsolete for a unit as it develops through its life cycle.
As a result, divestitures may be appropriate for a business in any of the
three stages of its life cycle. Divestitures in the start-up phase could result
from frequently reviewing the “bets” the corporation has in its portfolio.
Divestitures in the expansion phase may be necessary for a parent lacking
the right skills to push a business to its next level. Finally, divestitures in
the maturing phase may be proper when the parent does not have the best
skills to drive efficiency.
For example, pharmaceutical company executives face the challenge of
managing two different types of business. The major pharmaceutical companies emphasize innovation. They typically have core skills in the discovery, development, and marketing of innovative drugs. As these drugs come
to the market, they require a specialized sales force that interacts with medical practitioners. The products are patent protected and can be highly profitable in the case of blockbuster products with annual sales of more than $1
billion. As a patent’s expiration date nears, however, generic competition
usually enters the market. After expiration, prices plummet, and the pharmaceutical company loses significant market share to competitors with
generic products. The changed market dynamics require a very different set

WHY DIVESTITURES CREATE VALUE

473

Exhibit 16.5 Relative Shareholder Returns Decline over the Life
of a Business
Entrants’ average TRS relative to own industry
percent
15

10

5

0

Years in sample

–5

Trend line
Median

–10
1

5

10

15

20

25

Source: McKinsey’s corporate performance database. See also, R. Foster and S. Kaplan, Creative Destruction (New York: Doubleday, 2001).

of skills in cost-effective manufacturing and sales to maximize the value of
these products. The question is whether these skills are sufficiently present
in the pharmaceutical companies that hold onto their prescription drugs
after the patent expires.

Depressed Exit Prices
Holding on to a business unit too long can reduce the company’s shareholder returns and value. Companies that hold on to seriously underperforming business too long risk bringing down the value of the entire
corporation. By the time the company is forced to conduct a fire sale of the
assets, it has already destroyed substantial value and generally will receive
limited proceeds from the divestiture.
As businesses become more mature and competitive challenges increase, the level of expected future value creation generally declines. Exhibit 16.5 shows this by plotting a company’s total return to shareholders
(TRS) relative to the TRS of the company’s industry sector.6 As the business
matures, the company’s returns fall lower and lower relative to its industry.
Even in a growing industry, TRS can grow slowly or decline, as shown in
Exhibit 16.6 on page 474, which indicates decreasing valuation levels.
6

R. Foster and S. Kaplan, Creative Destruction (New York: Doubleday, 2001).

474

CREATING VALUE THROUGH DIVESTITURES

Exhibit 16.6 Shareholder Returns Can Decline Despite Ongoing Growth
Sales growth and TRS, paper industry
7-year rolling average

Real sales growth (percent)

Excess TRS over S&P 500

10

10
5
5
0

Real sales growth
0

–5
1962

1967

1972

1977

1982

–5

1987

1992

Excess TRS over S&P (percent)

15

15

1997
–10

Source: Compustat, McKinsey’s corporate performance database.

TRS reflects the market’s expectations for future performance. Relative to
outsiders, managers should be in a better position to determine a business’s
true performance prospects. When managers detect that market valuations in
an industry segment do not (yet) reflect the lower future performance potential, they have arrived at an opportune moment to divest the business.

HOW TO APPROACH DIVESTITURES
Given that a value-creating approach to divestitures may result in divesting both good and bad businesses throughout all stages of their life cycle,
executives need a way to decide which businesses to divest. Obviously, divesting a good business is often not an intuitive choice. Furthermore, the
selection of divestiture candidates goes beyond an assessment of the competitive position within the industry. Although this is important, portfolio
decisions should also be based on whether the parent company is the right
owner of a business. That is, does the parent company add value to the
business?

More than Business Positioning
The classic approach to managing a business portfolio evaluates a business’s competitive position within its industry, as well as the industry’s

HOW TO APPROACH DIVESTITURES

475

overall attractiveness. Many considerations go into the evaluation, including a company’s ability to compete in the industry. The ability to compete
may come from access to specific resources, such as talent, or specific capabilities. Judging industry attractiveness entails a broad assessment of economic factors, including growth potential and levels of competition. The
classic approach calls for divesting all businesses whose relative ability to
compete and whose industry attractiveness is low, and to invest in those capable of competing vigorously in attractive industries.

Parent and Business Unit Fit
Still, the classic approach has a weakness. It assumes that synergies between different businesses are negligible and that the corporation is the
best owner of all types of businesses. But keeping in mind that the corporate skills required to manage a business will differ at specific phases in its
life cycle, we conclude that the portfolio management approach should also
consider the fit between parent and business unit.
A more sophisticated approach to portfolio management assesses the
business portfolio based on business attractiveness and whether the corporation is the natural owner of the business, as illustrated in Exhibit 16.7.
This approach defines attractiveness (the horizontal axis in Exhibit 16.7) as

Exhibit 16.7 Market-Activated Corporate Strategy (MACS) Framework

Natural
owner
Parent company’s ability
to extract value from the
business unit, relative to
other potential owners
One
of the
pack

High

Medium

Low

Business unit’s value creation
potential as a stand-alone entity
1

Business unit
1

A business unit’s radius can be proportional to its sales, invested capital, or value added, relative to other business units.

476

CREATING VALUE THROUGH DIVESTITURES

the business’s value creation potential as a stand-alone enterprise. This
measure captures both the typical dimensions of the classic approach—the
industry attractiveness and the business’s competitive position. Note that
the ownership of the business does not affect its stand-alone value creation
potential. Instead, this dimension represents the maximum value that could
be obtained if the business were to operate independently. Businesses with
relatively large stand-alone value creation potential should perhaps be divested anyway because other companies may better extract that value. By
selling the business, the parent can capture some of that value, for example
through a premium.
Being the natural owner of the business unit means a corporation has
greater capabilities to extract value from the business unit than other possible owners have. Most corporations have a few distinctive competencies
(e.g., operational planning, cost management, brand management). We define a core competency as a world-class skill or process that distinguishes
the company from its competition, drives value creation, is sustainable and
not easily imitated, and can be applied across existing and new businesses.
Core competencies typically are the focus of senior management time and
effort and usually are one of the defining factors of a company’s culture.
Such skills can focus on driving either the performance of existing businesses or the growth of existing and new businesses.
An individual company’s profile of core competencies has implications for its business portfolio. A corporation with a “cost and capital manager” profile would own businesses that generate steady revenue streams
but have not yet aggressively managed costs. This corporation would avoid
businesses that require heavy investment (e.g., research and development). Corporations with an “operational planner” profile would focus on
businesses that could compete on specific operational dimensions such as
manufacturing, and would avoid operations that are unfamiliar to their
managers.

Deciding on a Divestiture
The principle that a business’s value-creation potential and the parent company’s ability to extract that value should determine divestiture decisions
provides a strong framework for making an initial assessment of a corporate
portfolio. In practice, however, several other factors will complicate the actual divestiture decisions:
• Limits on resources of the parent company
• Synergies or transactions between businesses

HOW TO APPROACH DIVESTITURES

477

• Pricing of the asset/business
• Legal, contractual, or regulatory barriers and transaction costs
• Liquidity of the market for the asset/business
Management time is one of the critical resources that limit a company.
Even a portfolio of attractive businesses with a good fit may have to be
pruned to ensure that all businesses receive the appropriate management
attention. This factor was important in the earlier example of Pactiv.
Divesting a business unit from the portfolio may also affect the remaining businesses. A divestiture can eliminate synergies between businesses
or change the competitive position of businesses remaining within the portfolio. Companies with a highly integrated business model—where business
units share significant assets—tend to have difficulty capturing value with
divestitures. Consider a bank that would like to sell a particular product
line. Without the bank’s customer base, the value of the product line might
be limited. In that case, a divestiture of the product line may not generate
any significant value.
The potential sales price of assets can also affect the decision to divest a
business. If the market currently attaches more value to a business than the
intrinsic value estimated by management, these conditions are favorable to
a near-term divestiture. Most likely, many of the high-tech ownership restructuring transactions at the end of the 1990s were at least partly motivated by the favorable valuation levels at that time. As discussed in Chapter
4, market valuation levels are generally in line with intrinsic value potential
in the long term but can deviate for periods. Executives should use their superior insight into their businesses to assess such possible value gaps with
regard to divestiture.
Even though a transaction might make strategic sense, legal, contractual, or regulatory barriers may limit its feasibility. In certain regulated
markets, it may be impossible to divest specific assets. Certain contractual
obligations can also limit divestiture possibilities. In addition, transaction
costs, including taxes, often affect transaction decisions. Asset sales may be
fully taxable, whereas public ownership transactions may provide more taxefficient structures. Furthermore, some businesses are not stand-alone entities before divestiture. Preparing a business for divestiture can require
extensive legal restructuring. A new legal entity may have to be created,
perhaps requiring multiple internal transactions to transfer different assets
into the new legal entity. Some countries tax capital gains on such internal
transactions.
The decision to divest a business will also depend on the liquidity of
the market for those particular assets. A recent study concludes that
liquidity is a key driver in explaining the difference in divestment behavior

478

CREATING VALUE THROUGH DIVESTITURES

between companies that seem to have similar fundamental reasons
to divest.7

DECIDING ON TRANSACTION TYPE
Once a corporation has identified businesses for divestiture, it must decide
what transaction structure to use. There are different types of private and
public transaction structures. Deciding on a specific transaction type depends on the availability of strategic or financial buyers, the need to raise
cash, and the benefits of retaining some level of control during the first
phase of the separation. Although the reason for pursuing a divestiture
should be to increase the value of the corporation, a parent’s urgent need
for cash may lead it to choose transaction types that deliver the maximum
amount of cash, rather than one that maximizes value.
In the remainder of this chapter, we provide a brief overview of different transaction types and discuss the trade-offs among alternative forms of
public ownership transactions, their impact on long-term performance, and
the dynamics of ownership structures over time.

Alternative Forms of Divestitures
Executives can choose from many different types of transaction structures,
both private and public transactions:
Private Transactions
• Trade sale: sale of part or all of a business to a strategic or a financial investor
• Joint venture: combining part or all of a business with other industry
players, other companies in the value chain, or venture capitalists
Public Transactions
• Initial public offering: sale of all shares of a subsidiary to new shareholders in the stock market
• Carve-out: sale of part of the shares in a subsidiary to new shareholders in the stock market
• Spin-off: distribution of all shares in a subsidiary to existing shareholders of the parent company

7

F. Schlingemann, R. Stulz, and R. Walkling, “Divestitures and the Liquidity of the Market for
Corporate Assets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 64 (2002): 117–144.

DECIDING ON TRANSACTION TYPE

479

• Split-off: an offer to existing shareholders of the parent company to exchange their shares in the parent company for shares in the subsidiary
• Tracking stock: separate class of parent shares that is distributed to existing shareholders of the parent company through a spin-off or sold
to new shareholders through a carve-out
In most cases, companies should choose a private transaction if they
can identify other parties that are better owners of the business. Private
transactions allow the company to sell the business unit at a premium and
capture value immediately. In most situations, the counterparties will be
strategic buyers, that is, other industry players. However, the company
should also consider financial buyers. Fiscal implications may affect this
decision in practice, because asset sales for cash typically generate a taxable profit and therefore may turn out to be less favorable.
If the company cannot identify better owners, it will have to choose a
public restructuring alternative. All the public transactions in the preceding list involve the creation of a new public security, but not all of them actually result in cash proceeds. Full IPOs and carve-outs result in cash
proceeds as securities are sold to new shareholders. In the other public
transactions, new securities are offered to existing shareholders, sometimes
in exchange for other existing shares (split-offs). When industry consolidation is expected, a public transaction may be more beneficial for the shareholders in the long term if the newly floated business unit would drive the
consolidation or would be a takeover candidate. In that case, shareholders
do not earn a premium from the divestiture itself, but significant value may
be created for shareholders in the future.

Spin-offs The most common form of public ownership transactions is a
spin-off. In this case, the parent company gives up control over the business unit by distributing the subsidiary shares to the parent shareholders.
This full separation maximizes the strategic flexibility of the subsidiary,
provides the greatest freedom to improve operations by sourcing from
more competitive companies (instead of the former parent), and avoids
conflicts of interest between the parent company and the business unit.
Spin-offs are usually carried out to improve operating performance of the
business units.
Many spin-offs are executed in two steps: a minority IPO (carve-out)
followed by a full spin-off relatively shortly thereafter. A one-step spin-off
is typically less complex and does not depend on market circumstances, as
no shares need to be issued. However, a two-step spin-off has benefits as
well. The minority IPO already establishes dedicated equity coverage, creates market making in the shares, and may reduce the risk of flow-back by
developing an interested investor base.

480

CREATING VALUE THROUGH DIVESTITURES

Exhibit 16.8 Long-Term Market Performance of Spin-Offs
Cumulative TRS for two-year post transaction period, percent
Subsidiaries

Average – index adjusted1

13.1

Median – index adjusted2

5.4

• Focus improving

• Not focus improving

Parents

3.1

7.4

8.6

(1.9)

1
Adjusted for either U.S. or European market index.
2

Adjusted for median return of index constituents over similar measurement period.
Source: Datastream, Compustat, McKinsey analysis.

According to McKinsey’s research on operating and capital market performance after completion of the transaction, spin-offs typically meet or exceed expectations for value creation. Analysis of parent and subsidiary
performance of a sample of spin-off transactions shows that the operating
margin of spin-off subsidiaries improves by one-third during the three years
after completion of the transaction. Operating margins of the parent companies on average show a very modest increase. Other researchers8 confirm
the improvements in operating performance, with larger improvements for
the subsidiary than for the parent company. In a later study,9 operating improvements were significant only for focus-improving spin-offs—where the
business spun off was different from the parent’s core line of business.
Post-transaction shareholder returns for spin-off parents and subsidiaries are consistent with the results on operating improvements. As Exhibit 16.8 shows, market-adjusted shareholder returns during a two-year
period after completion are positive for both parents and spun-off subsidiaries. However, the positive performance of the subsidiaries is driven by
focus-improving spin-offs. Transactions that did not improve focus had
mostly negative post-transaction returns.10
8

P. Cusatis, J. Miles, and J. Woolridge, “Some New Evidence That Spinoffs Create Value,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 7 (1994): 100–107.
9
L. Daley, V. Mehrotra, and R. Sivakumar, “Corporate Focus and Value Creation: Evidence from
Spinoffs,” Journal of Financial Economics, 45 (1997): 257–281.
10
Cusatis, Miles, and Woolridge (see note 8) find similar shareholder returns for parents and
subsidiaries.

DECIDING ON TRANSACTION TYPE

481

Carve-outs Sometimes parent companies do not want to give up control
over a business unit. The reason could be a desire to maintain some synergies between parent and subsidiary, or to shelter the subsidiary from market forces such as mergers and acquisitions. If the company does not want
to give up control, it should consider a minority carve-out or possibly a
tracking stock.
Carve-out subsidiaries typically have higher growth rates than their
parents but do not differ much in terms of operating performance. For highgrowth subsidiaries, a carve-out results in proceeds that can be used to
fund this growth.
The downside of ownership restructuring where the parent retains a
controlling stake in the subsidiary is the possibility of unclear governance.
If the parent enforces a minimum stake to retain control, this may restrict
growth and value creation by the separated business, which would destroy
the benefits that the carve-out was intended to deliver. In addition, these
companies risk further conflicts as the business unit’s executives pursue
the best interests of their own company and shareholders.
France Telecom’s carve out of mobile-phone operator Orange provides an
example of these conflicts. In 2001 France Telecom carved out a 14 percent
stake of Orange after acquiring the business from Vodafone, which had to
divest it after acquiring Mannesman. The carve-out’s main objective was to
raise cash to reduce France Telecom’s high leverage at the time. In a consolidating industry Orange could not use its equity for acquisitions without further diluting France Telecom’s stake. Using debt financing for acquisitions
would have worsened France Telecom’s balance sheet. Early in 2004, France
Telecom reacquired the Orange shares from the market. The delisting supported the implementation of France Telecom’s new integrated fixed-mobile
operator strategy at a time when the rationale for a separate listing was becoming unclear. Valuations had come down, and incorporating Orange’s
cash flows into group structure would deliver financing and fiscal benefits.
On average, the market-adjusted long-term performance for carve-out
parents and subsidiaries is negative. For a variety of reasons, however, there
is significant divergence of performance among carve-out transactions. Research indicates that carve-outs from financially distressed parent companies on average show negative market-adjusted returns, whereas other
carve-out companies earn positive market-adjusted returns.11 The subsidiaries from distressed parents continue to have relatively low operating
performance, indicating that they were partly contributing to the distress.
Additional evidence suggests that market performance is better for focusimproving carve-out transactions.12
11
J. Madura and T. Nixon, “The Long-Term Performance of Parent and Units Following Equity
Carve-Outs,” Applied Financial Economics, 12 (2002): 171–181.
12
A. Vijh, “Long-Term Returns from Equity Carveouts,” Journal of Financial Economics, 51 (1999):
273 –308.

482

CREATING VALUE THROUGH DIVESTITURES

Exhibit 16.9 Typical Carve-Out Trajectories
percent
Trajectory of carve-outs completed before 1999
100
31

39
Parent stake
11

3
8
8

All carve- Independent Merged/
outs
(Free float
acquired
>75%)
Median marketadjusted return
(percent)

26

–17

Reacquisition

–17

Delisted

Controlling interest
Majority stake

Parent
controlled
(Free float
<75%)
–32

Source: Datastream, Factiva, McKinsey analysis.

In addition, there is a clear relation between the success in the capital
markets of carve-out subsidiaries and the evolution of their ownership
structure. Research on a relatively small sample found that virtually all
minority carve-outs were either fully sold or reacquired at a later stage.13
Carve-out subsidiaries that were reacquired earned negative shareholder
returns in the period between the first issue and parent reacquisition. In
our research on more than 200 carve-outs announced before 1998, the majority of the carve-out entities did not last.14 As shown in Exhibit 16.9, only
8 percent of the carve-out subsidiaries we analyzed remained majoritycontrolled by the parent. The majority of the subsidiaries were spun off further, acquired, or merged with other players. Most of these acquisitions or
parent buybacks happened within a four-year period after the carve-out.
During the two years after completion, shareholder returns of the carveout entities showed a clear performance difference. Carve-outs with positive shareholder returns, when adjusted for market returns, were typically
13
A. Klein, J. Rosenfeld, and W. Beranek, “The Two Stages of an Equity Carve-Out and the Price
Response of Parent and Subsidiary Stock,” Managerial and Decision Economics, 12 (1991):
449– 460.
14
A. Annema, W. Fallon, and M. Goedhart, “Do Carve-Outs Make Sense?” McKinsey on Finance
(Fall 2001): 6 –10.

DECIDING ON TRANSACTION TYPE

483

spun off. Carve-outs with negative returns were usually acquired or
bought back by the parent, suggesting that they were less successful than
had been anticipated.
Recent examples of parent buybacks are France Telecom’s Wanadoo
and Deutsche Telekom’s T-Online. Both telecom companies had previously carved out minority stakes in their Internet service providers.
France Telecom floated a minority stake in Wanadoo around mid-year
2000 at €9 per share—the shares peaked around €22 in September 2000—
and reacquired the minority stake in early 2004 at €8.9 per share.
Deutsche Telekom floated a minority stake in T-Online in early 2000 at
€27 per share—the shares peaked around €47 in May 2000—and announced an offer to buy back the shares in October 2004 at €9.0 per share.
As separate companies, these Internet businesses no longer fitted with the
strategy of their telecom parents to integrate Internet operations with
fixed-line business to spur growth.
Carve-outs that lasted as parent-controlled companies with a free float
of less than 75 percent showed significant negative returns. In our research,
these carve-out subsidiaries typically had lower growth rates than other
carve-outs. This underperformance may indicate that the rationale of the
carve-out was flawed; the carve-outs may have happened for opportunistic
reasons unrelated to value creation. The parent companies most likely did
not intend to fully separate these businesses when they were carved out.
The low market returns could have resulted from the subsidiary lacking the
opportunity to maximize its potential under continued parent control, or
the parent taking advantage of high market valuation levels at the time,
without considering real ongoing benefits of full separation.
When thinking about partial ownership separation of a business unit
through a carve-out, executives need to plan for full separation. Although
a minority carve-out might initially shelter the unit from market forces
such as acquisitions, it is very unlikely that the parent can hold on to its
majority stake for long. In most situations, the separation is irreversible.
The separated businesses may attract new equity financing to fund their
growth or perhaps pursue acquisitions, both of which will most likely dilute the parent’s stake in the carved-out business, ultimately leading to
loss of control.

Tracking stock An alternative form of public ownership restructuring is
the issuance of tracking stock. Tracking stock offers a parent the advantage of maintaining control over a separated subsidiary, but often complicates corporate governance. Because there is no formal, legal separation
between the subsidiary and the parent, a single board of directors needs
to decide on potentially competing needs of common and tracking stock
shareholders. Furthermore, both entities are liable for each other’s debt,

484

CREATING VALUE THROUGH DIVESTITURES

which precludes flexible capital raising. Although there may be specific
tax or legal barriers for separation that would favor the use of a tracking
stock alternative, the evidence for tracking stock is far from convincing. In
an analysis of tracking stocks,15 this kind of transaction appeared to destroy value in the long term. On the elimination of tracking stock, the announcement effect for the parent was positive, reflecting the market’s
relief that the structure had been discontinued. Furthermore, tracking
stock is used far less often than carve-out and spin-off transactions, implying that this form of ownership restructuring fails to bring the benefits
that executives are looking for.

SUMMARY
As businesses go through their life cycles, corporations face renewed challenges for portfolio restructuring through divestiture. This process is natural and never-ending. A divested unit may very well pursue further
separations later in its lifetime, especially in dynamic industries undergoing rapid growth and technological change. A good example of these ownership dynamics is AT&T, as shown in Exhibit 16.10. After the company’s
original breakup in the 1980s, AT&T continued the process of ownership
separation in 1996, leading to five new public companies within five years.
AT&T first split off Lucent Technologies (telecom equipment and networking), which subsequently spun off Avaya (communication networks) in 2000
and executed a carve-out of Agere Systems (semiconductors) in the same
year. AT&T also spun off NCR (information technology hardware and software) in 1996 and carved out AT&T Wireless in 2000.
In contrast to AT&T, most corporations divest businesses only after resisting shareholder pressure. In delaying, they risk forgoing the significant
value creation potential from an active approach to divestitures. Ideally, executives should pursue an ongoing, proactive divestiture program to evaluate the corporate portfolio as its businesses evolve through their life cycles
and the industry itself changes.
Senior executives should prepare the organization for this cultural shift
to a more active approach. They should deliver the message that divestitures of good businesses will happen and should not be considered failures.
Because divesting good businesses may be hard for managers, corporations
should build forcing mechanisms into their divestiture program. For example, management could have regular dedicated exit review meetings to ensure that the topic remains on the executive agenda.
Furthermore, each business could have a “date stamp” of estimated exit.
Although this may not result in a definite exit, it would require regular
15
M. Billett and A. Vijh, “The Market Performance of Tracking Stocks” (working paper, Henry
B. Tippie College of Business, University of Iowa, February 2001).

REVIEW QUESTIONS

485

Exhibit 16.10 Dynamics of Ownership Restructuring
AT&T: Split-off of Lucent
(1996)

AT&T: Spin-off of NCR
(1996)

AT&T: Carve-out of AT&T
Wireless (2000)

AT&T

AT&T

AT&T

Lucent
Technologies

NCR

AT&T
Wireless

Lucent
Technologies

NCR

AT&T
Wireless

Lucent: Spin-off of Avaya
(2000)
Lucent
Technologies

Lucent: Carve-out of Agere
Systems (2000)
Lucent
Technologies

Avaya Inc

Agere
Systems

Avaya Inc

Agere
Systems

evaluations of all businesses. Other approaches could be to limit the number of businesses in the corporate portfolio or to strive for a target balance
in acquisitions and divestitures. Such practices help transform divestitures
from evidence of failure into shrewd strategies for building value.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Many corporate managers view a change in earnings (EPS) as a signal to the capital markets. Explain under what conditions a divestiture will lead to EPS dilution or accretion if the proceeds from the
divestiture are used (1) to repay debt or (2) to repurchase common
shares. What does this mean for the value created by a divestiture?
2. Describe the key reasons why divesting a business can create value
for shareholders, even when the business is still in the early stages of
its lifecycle.

486

CREATING VALUE THROUGH DIVESTITURES

3. Why might a corporation wish to divest its mature business units to
acquire business units in either the start-up or expansion phase of an
industry’s life cycle?
4. Identify and explain the significance of four factors that complicate a
manager’s decision to divest a business unit.
5. Identify and describe two private transaction and two public transaction approaches to corporate divesture. When are private transactions likely to create more value than public transactions?

17
Capital Structure
As the number of companies facing financial distress has risen over the past
several years, executives have assigned ever greater importance to decisions
that affect capital structure. Careful design and management of a company’s
capital structure do more to prevent value destruction than to boost value
creation. When managers make decisions about capital structure, they usually have much more to lose than to gain in terms of value.
In this chapter, we discuss tools and frameworks that can help managers make two levels of decisions about capital structure. The first level is
the strategic decision about the company’s long-term target capital structure. This includes issues such as the desired level of debt financing and
dividend payout ratios. The second level is more tactical and concerns the
best short-term steps to handle deviations from these long-term targets. A
typical tactical issue is what the company should do with any excess cash—
increase dividends, repurchase shares, or hold on to the cash. Specifically,
this chapter addresses the following topics:
• The impact of capital structure on value creation for shareholders
• The role of credit ratings in capital structure decisions
• The establishment of long-term capital structure targets
• The choice of specific steps to change a capital structure
• The impact on value creation for shareholders of financial engineering, such as hedging strategies or structured finance

CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND VALUE CREATION
Over the past several decades, the diversity of financing instruments has increased dramatically. Today debt comes in many different forms, including
487

488

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

straight debt, convertible bonds, commodity-linked bonds, and other structured debt. Equity instruments include “traditional” common and preferred
equity shares, employee stock options, convertible preferred stock, and more
exotic forms such as tracking stocks. Still, the fundamental question in designing a company’s capital structure is simply the choice between debt
(which represents a fixed claim on the enterprise value) and equity (the residual claim). We can further simplify this choice to asking what the company’s
leverage should be, as measured in terms of debt to total enterprise value.

Value Trade-Offs in Designing Capital Structure
Although academic researchers have investigated the issue for decades,
there is still no clear model for a company’s optimal leverage ratio, the
leverage that would create most value for shareholders.1 But there is evidence that leverage delivers key benefits as well as giving rise to certain
costs (Exhibit 17.1).

Tax savings The most obvious benefit of debt versus equity is the reduction of taxes. Interest charges for debt are tax deductible, whereas payments
to shareholders as dividends and share repurchases are not. Replacing equity with debt reduces taxable income and therefore increases the value of
the firm.2 However, this tax reduction does not make full debt funding optimal. For example, more debt funding may reduce corporate taxes but could
actually lead to higher taxes for investors. In many countries, investor taxes
are higher on interest income than on capital gains on shares. That situation
could actually make equity funding more attractive, depending on the relevant tax rates for corporations and investors.3
Reduction of corporate overinvestment The so-called free-cash-f low hypothesis4 argues that debt can help impose investment discipline on managers, as
private equity firms have known well for decades. Especially in companies
with strong cash flows and low growth opportunities, managers may be
tempted to loosen controls and increase corporate spending on perks or investment projects and acquisitions that boost growth at the expense of
value. If share ownership is widely dispersed, it is difficult and costly for
shareholders to assess when managers are engaging in such overinvestment.

1
For an overview of the literature, see M. Barclay and C. Smith, “The Capital Structure Puzzle:
Another Look at the Evidence,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 12(1) (1999): 8–20.
2
For an overview, see M. Grinblatt and S. Tit man, Financial Markets and Corporate Strategy, 2nd
ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002), Chapter 14; R. Brealey and S. Myers, Principles of Corporate
Finance, 7th ed. (New York, McGraw-Hill, 2003), Chapter 18.
3
M. Miller, “Debt and Taxes,” Journal of Finance, 32(2) (1977): 261–275.
4
M. Jensen, “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and Takeovers,” American Economic Review, 76(2) (1986): 323 –339.

CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND VALUE CREATION

489

Enterprise value

Exhibit 17.1 Capital Structure Value Trade-Offs

Cost of business
erosion and
investor conflicts

Reduction of
over investment
Tax savings

Enterprise value
with debt

Enterprise value
without debt

Optimal leverage

Leverage1

1

Defined as debt divided by enterprise value.

Debt curbs such managerial behavior by forcing the company to pay out free
cash flow according to scheduled interest and principal obligations.

Costs of business erosion and bankruptcy But higher levels of debt also
give rise to costs. Most notably, bankruptcy costs are the legal and administrative costs of liquidating or restructuring the company for the debt holders
after it has defaulted on its debt. Academic research indicates that these
costs are relatively small, around 3 percent of a company’s market value.5
However, the costs of business erosion6 are probably much higher. Highly
leveraged companies are more likely to forgo investment opportunities or reduce budgets for research and development and other costs for which the
payoffs are further in the future. As a result, these companies may lose significant value creation opportunities. Furthermore, as the risk of financial
distress increases, companies become more likely to lose customers, employees, and suppliers. The risk of losing business is high, particularly when the
products require long-term service and maintenance. A well-documented
example is that of Chrysler, which faced a 40 percent reduction of its car
sales amid consumer concerns over a possible bankruptcy in 1979.7
5

See, for example, L. Weiss, “Bankruptcy Resolution: Direct Costs and Violation of Priority of
Claims,” Journal of Financial Economics, 27(2) (1990): 285 –314.
6
We prefer the term business erosion to the more often used financial distress because the associated costs arise very gradually and long before there may be an actual distress event, such as
nonperformance on debt.
7
See, for example, T. Opler, M. Saron, and S. Tit man, “Corporate Liability Management: Designing Capital Structure to Create Shareholder Value,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 10(1)
(1997): 21–32.

490

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

Costs of investor conflicts Higher leverage may cause additional loss of
value as a result of conflicts of interest among debt holders, shareholders,
and managers.8 The costs of investor conflicts become relevant when companies come close to defaulting on their debt. In that case, shareholders
would prefer to take out any cash rather than invest it in value-creating opportunities, which would primarily benefit the debt holders. The shareholders’ preference would lead to corporate underinvestment. Shareholders also
may have more to gain from high-risk investments with short-term payoffs
than from low-risk investments with longer-term payoffs, even though the
latter could generate more value—leading to so-called asset substitution. Of
course, debt holders will try to protect themselves from these and other
conflicts with shareholders. For example, they may insist on various types
of covenants and monitor management actions. All of these measures come
at a cost, which will ultimately be carried by the company’s shareholders.
There is some empirical evidence on how these trade-offs between leverage levels are likely to differ depending on company characteristics:
• The higher a company’s returns, the lower its growth and business
risk, and the more fungible its assets and capabilities, the more
highly it should be leveraged. Such companies are more likely to
benefit from tax savings because they have stable profits. Imposing
discipline on management is more important because the cost of
overinvesting is likely to be high for these low-growth companies.
Because the company’s assets and capabilities have alternative uses,
the expected costs of business erosion are lower: even after a bankruptcy, the assets and capabilities would have significant value to
new owners. This explains why airlines can sustain high leverage9
in spite of their low returns and high risk: airplanes are easily deployed for use by other airline companies in case of bankruptcy.
• For companies with lower returns, higher growth potential and
risk, and highly specific assets and capabilities, leverage should be
lower. In this case, the potential tax savings are small because taxable profits are low in the near term. Management should not be too
financially restricted because investments are essential to capture
future growth. In addition, because of the high growth and the
uniqueness of the assets and capabilities, the expected costs of business erosion are high, too. If such companies go into bankruptcy,
they lose valuable growth opportunities, and any remaining assets
have very little value to third parties.
8

See, for example, S. Ross, R. Westerfield, and J. Jaffe, Corporate Finance, 6th ed. (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2001), pp. 427– 430.
9
Specifically, leverage is high when the operating leases of aircraft are taken into account.

CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND VALUE CREATION

491

These patterns are supported by ample evidence from academic research. The most highly leveraged industries are indeed typically mature
and asset-intensive; examples are steel, paper, and cement. Industries with
the lowest leverage, such as software, biotech, and high-tech start-ups, have
larger opportunities for growth and investment. Companies with greater
tangible assets usually sustain greater debt, because they have more assets
that can serve as collateral, reducing the costs of business erosion and bankruptcy.10 Companies with higher earnings volatility and higher advertising
and R&D costs tend to be financed with less debt.11 Leverage also proves to
be higher for companies with more fungible assets and lower for companies
producing durable goods, such as machinery and equipment, requiring
long-term maintenance and support.12

Pecking-order theory An alternative to the view that there is a trade-off
between equity and debt is a school of thought in finance theory that sees
a “pecking order” in financing.13 According to this theory, companies
meet their investment needs first by using internal funds (from retained
earnings), then by issuing debt, and finally by issuing equity. One of
the causes for this pecking order is that investors interpret financing
decisions by managers as signals of a company’s financial prospects. For
example, investors will interpret an equity issue as a signal that management believes shares are overvalued. Because of this interpretation, rational managers will turn to equity funding only as a last resort because it
could cause the share price to fall. An analogous argument holds for debt
issues, although the overvaluation signal is much smaller because the
value of debt is much less sensitive to a company’s financial success.14
According to the theory, companies will have lower leverage when
they are more mature and profitable, simply because they can fund internally and do not need any debt or equity funding. However, the empirical
evidence for the theory is not conclusive. For example, mature companies
generating strong cash flows are among the most highly leveraged companies, whereas the pecking-order theory would predict they would have

10
R. Rajan and L. Zingales, “ What Do We Know about Capital Structure? Some Evidence from
International Data,” Journal of Finance, 50(5) (1995): 1421–1460.
11
M. Bradley, G. Jarell, and E. Kim, “On the Existence of an Optimal Capital Structure: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Finance, 39(3) (1984): 857–878; and M. Long and I. Malitz, “The
Invest ment-Financing Nexus: Some Empirical Evidence,” Midland Corporate Finance Journal, 3(3)
(1985): 53 –59.
12
See note 1 and S. Tit man and R. Wessels, “The Determinants of Capital Structure Choice,”
Journal of Finance, 43(1) (1988): 1–19.
13
See G. Donaldson, “Corporate Debt Capacity: A Study of Corporate Debt Policy and the Determination of Corporate Debt Capacity,” Harvard Graduate School of Business (Boston, 1961);
and S. Myers, “The Capital Structure Puzzle,” Journal of Finance, 39(3) (1974): 575 –592.
14
An exception is, of course, the value of debt in a financially distressed company.

492

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

the lowest leverage. High-tech start-up companies are among the least leveraged, rather than debt-loaded, as the theory would predict.15
In light of the evidence, it seems that the signaling hypotheses underlying the pecking-order theory are quite relevant for financial managers, but
more so for selecting and timing specific funding alternatives than for setting capital structure targets.16 Recent research among financial executives
confirms that this interpretation corresponds closely to current management practice.17

Is There an Optimal Capital Structure?
Although the costs and benefits of leverage are clear, there is less clarity on
how to determine the optimal capital structure for a given company. How
should managers decide on the best target leverage for their companies?
The bad news is that there seems to be no exact answer. The good news is
twofold. First, for most companies, the answer is not as critical for shareholder value as some practitioners think. Second, managers can find meaningful indications of an effective capital structure, that is, a structure that is
hard to improve on in terms of creating shareholder value (see the following section).
How critical is leverage for shareholder value anyway? Exhibit 17.2
shows the distribution of credit ratings for all U.S. and European companies with a market capitalization over $1 billion according to Standard
& Poor’s. The ratings are a measure of a company’s credit quality between
AAA (highest quality) and D (defaulted), with ratings of BBB− and higher
indicating so-called investment-grade quality. The vast majority of the
companies are in the rating category of A+ to BBB−. Credit ratings are
fairly persistent over time, so most companies probably do not move in
and out of this range. Below the BBB-rating level interest rates are much
higher because many investors cannot invest in debt that is not investment
grade, and the flexibility to raise capital is limited, especially in periods
when credit is tight.

15
See note 1 and M. Baker and J. Wurgler, “Market Timing and Capital Structure,” Journal of Finance, 52(1) (2002): 1–32.
16
See also A. Hovakimian, T. Opler, and S. Tit man, “The Debt-Equity Choice,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 36(1) (2001): 1–24, for evidence that the pecking-order theory predicts short-term movements in corporate debt levels but that long-term changes are more in line
with the trade-offs discussed earlier in this section.
17
J. Graham and H. Campbell, “How Do CFOs Make Capital Budgeting and Capital Structure
Decisions?” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 15(1) (2002): 8–23.

CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND VALUE CREATION

493

Exhibit 17.2 Most Larger Companies Have Credit Ratings between A
and BBB1

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4

12
11

10

8

0

0

0

0

CCC

CC

C

B

B+

BB–

BB

BB+

BBB

BBB–

A–

BBB+

A

1
B–

3
1

A+

AA

0

4

2
AA–

1

6

CCC+

6
5

AA+

2
0

16
15

AAA

Percent of sample

72% of sample

Rating
Investment grade

Subinvestment grade

1

Standard & Poor’s credit ratings for all U.S. and European companies with a market capitalization over $1 billion.
Source: Datastream, Bloomberg, McKinsey analysis.

We interpret this distribution of ratings as evidence that for most companies, the range from A+ to BBB− is apparently an effective rating level.
As we will see later, it does not mean that all companies have a similar capital structure. Rather, companies with the same credit rating can have very
different capital structures across industry sectors because of different
business risk.
Within the range from A+ to BBB−, shareholder value does not vary
much with a company’s capital structure. This is especially true when we
compare the impact of credit rating with the impact of key value drivers
such as ROIC and growth.
Let’s illustrate this with a simple example while focusing on just the tax
savings from increased debt financing. Exhibit 17.3 on page 494 shows how
the multiple of enterprise value over EBITA for an average company in the
S&P 500 would change with the amount of debt financing, as measured by
the interest coverage ratio.18 The EBITA multiple is estimated with the basic
value driver formula as presented in Chapter 3, applied using an APV

18
This is the ratio of EBITA to interest expenses, which is widely used by managers and credit
raters to measure financial health; see the next section for more details.

494

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

Exhibit 17.3 Capital Structure Changes Have Limited Impact on Enterprise
Value for Most Larger Companies
Approximate coverage range
for A+ to BBB- rating

20.0

EV/EBITA

15.0
6% sales growth
10.0
3% sales growth
5.0

0.0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Interest coverage1
1

EBITA/Interest.

methodology.19 We assume a long-term ROIC of 14 percent and an unlevered
cost of capital of 9 percent—typical scores for a middle-of-the-road S&P 500
company.
As Exhibit 17.3 shows, enterprise value does not change dramatically
with the level of debt funding except at very low levels of interest coverage
( below 2). But at such low levels of coverage, the company will likely have a
credit rating below investment grade, and two factors will make the real
value impact of additional debt lower than what follows from this simple
model. First, the costs of business erosion and investor conflicts will be19
Applying the APV methodology to the value driver formula and discounting the tax shield on
interest at the unlevered cost of equity results in the following formula:
g
1−
ROIC ∞ kD × T × Dt
Value = NOPLAT ×
+∑
t =1
ku − g
(1 + ku )t

where ku = Unlevered cost of equity
D = Debt in year t
kD = Cost of debt
T = Tax rate
(All other symbols as defined in Chapter 3.)
If we make the additional assumption that companies finance with debt while maintaining a
stable interest coverage ratio, the formula can be simplified as follows:
g
INT 
T

 1 − ROIC + 1 − T × EBITA 
Value = NOPLAT ×
ku − g
where EBITA/INT = Target coverage ratio

CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND VALUE CREATION

495

come significant and offset some of the tax savings. Second, the expected
value of any tax savings itself will decline because of the growing probability that the company will not capture these savings in the first place. The
real value impact will therefore be even less than predicted by our value
driver formula at low coverage ratios, so the true curve would be even flatter than shown here.
Especially when compared with the impact of additional growth (also
shown in the exhibit) or ROIC improvements, capital structure is far from a
big value booster. In this light, it is therefore not surprising that most companies have a credit rating in the range of A+ to BBB−, roughly corresponding to coverage ratios of 5 to 11 times interest.
Of course, capital structure can make a big difference for companies at
the far ends of the interest-coverage spectrum. Companies with strong earnings and cash flows but without any debt probably fail to capture significant
value for their shareholders. Well-documented examples include pharmaceutical companies such as American Home Products, which had almost no
debt for more than 30 years until 1989. The forgone tax shields on debt
amounted to an estimated $1.7 billion over that period.20 At the other extreme, companies with very high levels of leverage at an interest coverage of
2 and less probably do not render their shareholders a great service either.
Such leverage levels are unsustainable and more likely to destroy shareholder value, due to high probability of business erosion, investor conflicts,
and ultimately, bankruptcy.

Setting an Effective Capital Structure
Difficult as it may be to determine an optimal capital structure, it is much
easier to find an effective structure—that is, one that cannot clearly be improved upon in terms of shareholder value creation because it is somewhere
in the relatively flat range of the valuation curves of Exhibits 17.1 and 17.3.
To find such an effective structure, you can use several reference points.

Peer group comparison An industry peer group is a good starting point.
The key value trade-offs in designing capital structure as laid out earlier are
largely industry specific: growth, return, and asset specificity. If these
characteristics are fairly similar across a peer group of companies, market
forces will drive these companies toward an effective capital structure. By
analyzing what capital structure most companies in the peer group have,
you obtain at least some understanding for what a reasonable capital structure could be. Furthermore, the approach also makes sense from a competitive perspective: As long as your capital structure is not too different, you
have at least not given away (or gained) any competitive advantage derived
20

See T. Opler, M. Saron, and S. Tit man, “Corporate Liability Management: Designing Capital
Structure to Create Shareholder Value,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 10(1) (1997): 21–32.

496

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

from capital structure. For example, there is academic evidence that highleverage companies sometimes fall victim to price wars started by financially stronger competitors.21

Credit-rating analysis Peer group comparisons offer meaningless conclusions if many companies in the sector are not at their targeted capital structure. For example, many players in the telecommunications sector had too
much debt in the early 2000s as a result of aggressive acquisitions and investments in mobile communication. In that case, it is more interesting to analyze
only peers with investment-grade credit ratings and determine what it takes
to achieve such a rating. This allows you not only to set a target structure but
also to assess how your credit rating would be affected if you deviated from
that targeted structure. Since the 1960s, there has been empirical evidence of
company credit ratios clustering around industry-specific averages, further
indicating that each industry has a different effective capital structure level
(see also Chapter 10, Exhibit 10.15).22
Cash flow analysis Although external comparisons of capital structure
and credit ratings are important, every company will face specific challenges due to particular investment needs, dividend policy, and other considerations. You should therefore carefully analyze future cash inflows and
outflows and the capital structure implications. Test a given capital structure under different scenarios to analyze how credit quality will develop
over time and what future funding deficits or surpluses to expect. Assess
the company’s financial f lexibility: What capital structure will enable you to
undertake planned acquisitions or make planned capital expenditures?
Also test for financial robustness: What levels of risk (e.g., from business or
sector downturns) can the company absorb with a given capital structure?
Finally, set a capital structure target that accommodates both sufficient
flexibility and robustness. Later in this chapter, we will illustrate this approach with a numerical example.
CREDIT RATINGS AND CAPITAL STRUCTURE
Before we can offer guidance on how to set a capital structure target for a
specific company, we need to provide further background on credit ratings.
Credit-rating estimates are important for three reasons:
1. Ratings are a useful summary indicator of capital structure health;
lower ratings reflect higher default probabilities. Exhibit 17.4 shows
21

See, for example, P. Bolton and D. Scharfstein, “A Theory of Predation Based on Agency Problems in Financial Contracting,” American Economic Review, 80(1) (1990): 93 –106.
22
E. Schwarz and R. Aronson, “Some Surrogate Evidence in Support of the Concept of Optimal
Financial Structure,” Journal of Finance, 22(1) (1967): 10–18.

CREDIT RATINGS AND CAPITAL STRUCTURE

497

Exhibit 17.4 Corporate Bond Ratings
percent
Standard &
Poor’s
AAA
AA
A
BBB
BB
B
CCC
CC
C

Default
probability1
0.12
0.33
0.75
3.84
14.45
33.02
61.35

Moody’s
Aaa
Aa
A
Baa
Ba
B
Caa
Ca
C

Default
probability2
0.12
0.24
0.54
2.16
11.17
31.99
60.83

Investment
grade

Subinvestment
grade

1

Percentage defaulting within 5 years based on default rates between 1981–2003.
Percentage defaulting within 5 years based on default rates between 1970–2003.
Source: Standard & Poor’s RatingsDirect database, Statistical Review of Moody’s Rating Performance, 1920–2003, Moody’s (2004),
McKinsey analysis.

2

the average default probabilities per credit rating category for Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s. For example, a capital structure rated B
or lower is probably not a wise target because of the very high probability of default.
2. Ratings largely determine the company’s access to the debt markets. Below investment-grade BBB ratings, the opportunities for
debt funding are much smaller because many investors are barred
from investing in sub-investment-grade debt.
3. Ratings are nowadays important elements in the communication to
shareholders. Managers should be able to explain whether or not
their company can or should maintain its current rating. Since the
stock market bubble of the 1990s this has become an important indicator of corporate health for equity investors.
The process of setting a credit rating for a company is elaborate and relies considerably on qualitative assessment of the historical and likely future performance of a company’s management and business. Nevertheless,
empirical evidence shows that credit ratings are primarily related to two financial indicators:23
• Size in terms of sales or market capitalization
• Coverage in terms of EBITA or EBITDA divided by interest expenses24
23

See, for example, J. Pettit, C. Fitt, S. Orlov, and A. Kalsekar, “The New World of Credit Ratings” (UBS research report, September 2004).
24
Standard & Poor’s also uses measures such as FFO (free f low from operations), which differs
somewhat from EBITDA but essentially also intends to capture operational cash f low.

498

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

Size is especially relevant in its extremes: for example, all companies
with AAA ratings are at market capitalizations higher than $50 billion. One
explanation for the role of size is the greater likelihood of risk diversification in larger companies. But the relation between size and credit rating is
not meaningful for capital structure policy: size is not really controllable by
management and has no bearing on the credit health of an individual company. Coverage is much more relevant in this context. Let’s first discuss
how coverage is related to some other widely used indicators for financial
health or risk such as leverage and solvency.

Coverage A straightforward indicator of a company’s ability to comply
with its short-term debt service obligations is its interest coverage, defined
as follows:
Coverage =

EBITDA
EBITA
Net Debt
or
or
Interest
Interest
EBITDA

EBITA interest coverage measures how many times a company could pay
its interest commitments out of its ongoing operational cash flow if it invested only an amount equal to its annual depreciation charges to keep business running. When expressed as EBITDA to interest, it measures available
cash flow before any capital expenditures and taxes. When interest rates are
comparable across companies, so-called debt coverage, net debt to EBITDA,
is sometimes used instead of interest coverage. Debt coverage also measures
the company’s ability to service its debt in the short term but is more insightful when companies use large amounts of convertibles or low-interest
debt. In terms of straightforward EBIT(D)A interest coverage, their financial
health might look very strong. However, when they need to roll over their
convertible or low-interest debt into regular debt funding at higher rates,
their interest coverage will plummet. Under these circumstances, net debt to
EBITDA will be less distorted than EBIT(D)A interest coverage.

Leverage The traditional measure in the academic literature is leverage in
terms of market value, defined as the market value of debt (D) over the market value of debt plus equity (E):
Leverage =

D
D+E

It measures how much of the company’s enterprise value is “claimed”
by debt holders and is an important concept for estimating the benefits of
tax shields from debt financing. It is therefore also a crucial input in calculating the WACC (see Chapter 10 on capital structure weights).

CREDIT RATINGS AND CAPITAL STRUCTURE

499

Leverage, however, suffers from several drawbacks as a way of measuring and targeting a company’s capital structure. First, companies could have
very low leverage in terms of market value but still be at a high risk of financial distress if their short-term cash flow is low relative to interest payments.
High-growth companies are usually at very low levels of leverage, but this
does not mean their debt is low risk. A second drawback is that market value
can change radically (especially for high-growth, high-multiple companies),
making leverage a fast-moving indicator. For example, several European
telecom companies, including Royal KPN Telecom and France Telecom, had
what appeared to be reasonable levels of debt financing in terms of leverage
during the stock market boom of the late nineties. Credit providers appeared willing to provide credit even though the underlying near-term
cash flows were not very high relative to debt service obligations. But when
the market values plummeted in 2001, leverage for these companies shot up,
and financial distress loomed. Thus, it is risky to target a market-valuebased measure for capital structure.
This does not mean that leverage and coverage are fundamentally divergent measures. Far from it, they actually measure the same thing but over
different time horizons. For ease of explanation, consider a company that
has no growth in revenues, profit, or cash flows. For this company, we can
express the leverage and coverage as follows:25

Leverage =
Coverage =

D
D+E

=

Int t=1 + PV ( Int t= 2 ) + . . . + PV ( Int t→∞ )
NOPLATt=1 + PV ( NOPLATt=2 ) + . . . + PV ( NOPLATt→∞ )

EBITA t=1
Int t=1

=

NOPLATt=1
1
×
Int t=1
(1 − T )

where D = Market value of debt
E = Market value of equity
T = Tax rate
The market value of debt captures the present value of all future interest payments, assuming perpetual rollover of debt financing. The enterprise value (E + D) is equal to the present value of future NOPLAT
because depreciation equals capital expenditures for a zero-growth company. A leverage ratio therefore measures the company’s ability to cover
its interest payments over a very long term. The problem is that short-term
interest obligations are what mainly get a company into financial distress.
Coverage, in contrast, focuses only on the short-term part of the leverage
25
The simplifying no-growth assumption is for illustration purposes only. For a growing company, the same point holds.

500

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

definition, keeping in mind that NOPLAT roughly equals EBITA × (1 − T).
Coverage indicates how easily a company can service its debt in the
near term.
Both measures are meaningful, and they are complementary. For example, if market leverage were very high in combination with strong current
interest coverage, this could indicate the possibility of future difficulties in
sustaining current debt levels. This situation applies to single-product companies faced with rapidly eroding margins and cash flows because the
product is approaching the end of its life cycle. In spite of very high interest
coverage, such companies may not attain high credit ratings and could face
limited debt capacity.

Solvency Book measures of debt over total assets or debt over equity are
seldom as meaningful as coverage or leverage. The key reason is that these
solvency measures fail to capture the company’s ability to comply with debt
service requirements in either the short or long term. Market-to-book ratios
can vary significantly across sectors and over time, making solvency a poor
proxy for long-term debt service ability. The Dutch publishing company
Wolters-Kluwer, for example, has had low book equity for years because
under Dutch GAAP it had written off all goodwill on acquisitions directly
against equity. In spite of very low solvency, with a ratio of equity to total
assets below 20 percent, Wolters-Kluwer has been at a credit rating around
A, well within investment grade.
Solvency becomes more relevant in times of financial distress, when a
company’s creditors use it as a rough measure of the available collateral.
Higher levels of solvency usually indicate that debt holders stand better
chances of recovering their principal and interest due—assuming that asset
book values are reasonable approximations of asset liquidation values.
However, for capital structure decisions at a going concern, solvency is
much less relevant than coverage and leverage measures.
Coverage as key driver of credit ratings Many models have attempted to
explain credit ratings or default probabilities from a company’s financial
and business characteristics.26 Based on our own empirical analyses, we
find that a limited number of credit ratios explain credit rating fairly well,
with interest coverage27 as the single most significant indicator. Exhibit 17.5
summarizes the results for a sample containing all U.S. and European companies rated by Standard & Poor’s (excluding financial institutions). It
26

For an overview, see R. Cantor, “An Introduction to Recent Research on Credit Ratings,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 28(11) (2004): 2565 –2573; and E. Alt man, “Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis, and the Prediction of Corporate Bankruptcy,” Journal of Finance, 23(4) (1968):
589–609.
27
This holds for EBITA as well as EBITDA coverage measures.

CREDIT RATINGS AND CAPITAL STRUCTURE

501

Exhibit 17.5 Interest Coverage and Credit Rating
R2 = 0.45
30

Observed coverage
Median coverage
First and third quartile coverage

25

Interest coverage1

20

15

10

5

0

–5

–10

AAA AA+

AA

AA–

A+

A

A– BBB+ BBB BBB– BB+ BB

BB–

B+

B

B–

1EBITA/Interest.

Source: Standard & Poor’s RatingsDirect database, McKinsey analysis.

shows how interest coverage is a key explaining variable for the Standard &
Poor’s credit ratings, with more than 45 percent of rating differences explained by interest coverage alone.
Analyzing the data further, we also find that coverage for a given credit
rating differs by industry in a predictable way. In Exhibit 17.6 on page 502,
we show how coverage ratios differ across sectors for a given credit rating.
For example, telecom companies will have better credit ratings than steel
companies at the same coverage level. To understand why this is the case,
we estimated the volatility28 of EBITDA over the five years preceding the
date of the credit rating. For industries with higher volatility of EBITDA,
the coverage requirements are higher to attain a given credit rating, as the
exhibit shows. This makes sense: For a given level of interest coverage,
higher volatility implies a higher probability that a company will lack sufficient cash flow to service its interest commitment in the future. As a result,
the credit rating will be lower.
28

EBITDA volatility is measured here as the average standard deviation of relative annual
changes in EBITDA for the largest 25 companies in each sector in terms of market capitalization.

502

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

Exhibit 17.6 Interest Coverage and Credit Rating for Selected
Industry Sectors
Volatility2
percent
Semiconductor 41.2

70
60

Interest coverage1

50
40

Steel

26.5

Computer
hardware

29.8

Retail
Chemical

13.5
11.4

Telecom

10.4

30
20
10
0
B–10

B

B+ BB– BB BB+ BBB– BBB BBB+ A–

A

A+ AA– AA AA+ AAA

Rating

1
EBITDA/Interest.
2

Median volatility of EBITDA over the prior 5 years for the largest 25 companies in each sector.
Source: Standard & Poor’s RatingsDirect database, McKinsey analysis.

Thus, by differentiating the interest coverage requirements across sectors, it is possible to develop an estimate of the likely credit rating for a
given level of operating profit and interest. Obviously, we could further refine the analysis by including more explanatory ratios, such as net debt to
EBITDA, free flow from operations (FFO) to interest, solvency, and more.
However, these ratios are often highly correlated, so they do not always add
explanatory power.

Credit rating and credit spread The difference between the yields on corporate bonds and risk-free bonds—the credit spread—increases with lower
credit ratings because the probability of default increases. Exhibit 17.7 plots
the cumulative default probabilities over 5 and 10 years and the average credit
spreads between 1992 and 2004 against the credit ratings. Notice that credit
ratings are not a linear scaling of default probabilities: the difference in default probability between AAA and BBB is much smaller than the difference
between a BBB and a B rating. Spreads reflect the increasing default probabilities almost proportionally. However, at the investment-grade benchmarking
of BBB, the spread appears to increase more aggressively, although this is less
pronounced when excluding the three years immediately following the peak
of the bubble in 2000. One explanation is that some institutional investors

CREDIT RATINGS AND CAPITAL STRUCTURE

503

Exhibit 17.7 Default Probability and Credit Spread
Default probability after 5 years
Default probability after 10 years
Average spread over government bonds
Average spread excluding 2000–2002

50

600

500

40

400

30

300

20

200

10

100

0

Spread, basis points

Cumulative default probability, percent

60

0
AAA AA+ AA AA– A+

A

A– BBB+ BBB BBB– BB+ BB BB– B+

B

B–

CCC

Rating
Source: Bloomberg, Standard & Poor’s RatingsDirect database, McKinsey analysis.

cannot invest in debt that is below investment grade (BBB−), so the debt market is considerably smaller for below-investment-grade debt, and interest
rates are correspondingly higher. Apart from this turning point at the investment grade level, spreads appear to follow changes in default probabilities
fairly closely.

Market-based rating approach Over the past decade, new approaches to
credit assessment have been developed based on the notion that equity
can be modeled as a call option on the company’s enterprise value, with
the debt obligations as the exercise price.29 Using option valuation models
and market data on price and volatility of the shares, these approaches estimate the future default probability, that is, the probability that enterprise value will be below the value of debt obligations.30 The advantage is
that all information captured by the equity markets is directly translated
into the default estimates. Traditional credit ratings tend to lag changes in
a company’s performance and outlook because they aim to measure credit
29

This is because equity is a residual claim on the enterprise value after payment of principal
and interest for debt. It has value only to the extent that enterprise value exceeds debt commitments. See R. Merton, “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest Rates,”
Journal of Finance, 29 (1974): 449– 470; or, for an introduction, R. Brealey and S. Myers, Principles
of Corporate Finance, 7th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003), ch. 24.
30
See P. Crosbie and J. Bohn, “Modeling Default Risk,” Moody’s KMV (2003).

504

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

quality “through the cycle”31 and are less sensitive to short-term fluctuations in quality.
The disadvantage of market-based ratings is that no fundamental analysis is performed on the company’s underlying business and financial
health. If equity markets have missed some critical information, the resulting default probability estimates do not reflect it. As we discussed in Chapter 4, markets reflect company fundamentals most of the time, but not
always. When they do not, the market-based rating approaches would incorrectly estimate default risk as well, as happened in the case of Royal KPN
Telecom, which took the equity market (and the traditional rating agencies,
for that matter) by surprise in 2001, suffering a sudden decline in both share
prices and credit ratings.32

PRACTICAL APPROACH TO DESIGNING AND MANAGING
CAPITAL STRUCTURE
In our experience, many CFOs aim to have their company’s capital structure meet criteria such as a specific credit rating, interest coverage, or some
other measure of keeping a “safe buffer” of annual cash inflow over fixed
charges such as interest payments. Surveys among financial executives also
show that they put more emphasis on preserving financial flexibility than
on minimizing cost of capital.33
Empirical analyses have demonstrated that companies actively manage
their capital structure and stay within certain leverage boundaries. Companies are much more likely to issue equity when they are overleveraged
relative to this target, and much less likely when they are underleveraged.34
They make adjustments toward target capital structure with one or two
years’ delay, rather than immediately, since that would become impractical
and costly due to share price volatility and transaction costs.35 This is also
the pattern we would expect to find if companies would target interest coverage: share prices are ultimately driven by future operating earnings and
cash flows. If share prices rise and remain there, earnings and cash flows
eventually will rise—and that is probably when companies start to increase leverage.

31
See E. Alt man and H. Rijken, “How Rating Agencies Achieve Rating Stability,” Journal of
Banking and Finance, 28(11) (2004): 2679–2714.
32
See Crosbie and Bohn, “Modeling Default Risk,” p. 23. (Note 30)
33
See Graham and Campbell, “How Do CFOs Make Decisions?” (Note 17)
34
P. Marsh, “The Choice between Equity and Debt: An Empirical Study,” Journal of Finance, 37(1)
(1982): 121–144.
35
See, for example, M. Leary and M. Roberts, “Do Firms Rebalance Their Capital Structures?”
14th Annual Utah Winter Finance Conference, Tuck Contemporary Corporate Finance Issues III
Conference Paper, 2004.

DESIGNING AND MANAGING CAPITAL STRUCTURE

505

Although leverage and coverage ratios all point in the same direction,
interest coverage targets are more appropriate for setting long-term capital
structure targets. One reason is that coverage measures credit quality more
accurately (see the discussion of leverage and coverage in this chapter). A
second reason is that leverage would be a moving target as share prices fluctuate. Finally, coverage can be more readily applied when making long-term
capital structure analyses, because it does not require any valuation estimate going forward but simply interest and EBIT(D)A.
In our experience, a straightforward approach is sufficient to develop a
long-term capital structure for a company. The approach consists of five
steps and is scenario driven. A simple example can illustrate.
Assume a company has sales of €1 billion per year. The company currently has a BBB credit rating and an EBITA-to-interest coverage ratio of 5. It
has developed aggressive investment plans for the next six years to boost its
sales growth from a current level of 3.5 percent per year to a peak level of 20
percent per year. The investment requirements are accordingly high,
amounting to around €340 million in NPPE and working capital until 2010.
Furthermore, the company is looking out for interesting acquisition opportunities among its smaller competitors. Its current operating margins at 5
percent of sales will not generate sufficient funds to support such capital
expenditures, and new funding is needed. The CFO wants to develop a capital structure that is robust enough that a business downturn will not endanger the company’s financial stability, yet flexible enough to allow for a
sizable acquisition.

Step 1: Project financing surplus or deficit The first step is to project the
free cash flows resulting from the proposed business plan as well as the financing cash flows resulting from the current capital structure as if unchanged. Assume that any resulting funding deficit or surplus flow is
balanced by additional new short-term debt or excess cash, respectively.
These projections are shown in Exhibit 17.8 on page 506. It is clear from this
chart that the operating cash flows alone cannot support this level of investment. Furthermore, the company has commitments to repay existing
debt and to pay out dividends. The cumulative deficit over the next six
years amounts to over €280 million. As a working assumption assume that
this is to be balanced by new short-term debt.
Step 2: Set target credit rating and ratios Next, determine what credit
rating the company wants to target in the future. Given the need for additional funding, it is probably wise to maintain an investment-grade rating
for better access to the capital markets. The CFO wants to aim for a BBB+
rating, which would require an EBITA-to-interest coverage of at least 5 in its
industry. In addition to this target, the company should not drop below an
interest coverage of 2, even under adverse business conditions, to prevent

506

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

Exhibit 17.8 Projections of Financing Surplus (Deficit)
€ million
Cash flow statement
NOPLAT
(Increase) decrease in working
capital
(Increase) decrease in net PPE
Free cash flow

2005
36
(8)

2006
41
(24)

2007
49
(36)

2008
54
(22)

2009
57
(12)

2010
60
(13)

(15)
13

(47)
(30)

(72)
(59)

(43)
(11)

(24)
21

(25)
22

Interest expense existing debt1
Debt repayment
Dividends
Cash flow existing financing
Funding surplus (deficit)

(6)
(20)
(10)
(36)
(23)

(4)
(50)
(11)
(65)
(95)

(3)
(20)
(12)
(35)
(95)

(1)
(30)
(13)
(45)
(56)

(0)
(20)
(14)
(35)
(14)

–
(10)
(15)
(25)
(3)

Excess cash (increase) decrease
Interest income excess cash1
Equity issuance (repayment)
Debt issuance (repayment)
Interest expense new debt1
New funding

–
–
–
24
(1)
23

–
–
–
101
(6)
95

–
–
–
106
(11)
95

–
–
–
70
(14)
56

–
–
–
29
(16)
14

–
–
–
20
(17)
3

1

After-tax.

any financial distress. At 2 times EBITA, the company would still be cash
positive after subtracting taxes and interest. For other credit ratios, no targets are set at the moment. If any covenants are in place for existing debt, of
course, these requirements also should be observed when setting any target
coverage ratios.

Step 3: Develop capital structure for base case scenario The third step
begins by identifying and understanding the key drivers of the financing
deficit. The familiar value drivers, growth and return on invested capital,
determine uses and sources of free cash f low from operations. Higher growth
in general leads to greater cash requirements as investments in NPPE and
working capital usually go up with growth; higher ROIC leads to lower
cash requirements from either higher operating margins over sales or
higher turnover of invested capital. (But capital turnover increases have
stronger short-term cash impact than margin increases, for the same
change in ROIC.) This company’s aggressive growth strategy drives a
need for cash. Adjusting the growth plans at any time would significantly
reduce the cash flow deficit.
In terms of the drivers of financing cash f low, the existing debt requires
interest and principal payments according to a fixed schedule. Until 2010,
all of the company’s existing debt needs to be paid down, with a peak re-

DESIGNING AND MANAGING CAPITAL STRUCTURE

507

payment of €50 million in 2006. On top of that, the company has established
a policy of paying out about 35 percent of profits in shareholder dividends.
With this information, you can develop some initial ideas about the
company’s future capital structure. Under the base-case projections, the
company fails to reach its targeted coverage ratio if the company issues no
equity and all funding requirements are met with short-term debt (indicated in Exhibit 17.9 on p. 508). Given the key drivers just described, the
company could do one of two things: either reduce its growth plans and
capital spending, or issue new capital. Reducing the dividend payout ratio,
for example, would have limited effect. Given that equity issuances have
high fixed transaction costs, it is probably best to issue a large amount of equity capital in year 1, around €125 million. This will generate more than
€100 million of excess cash in 2005, but that will be almost depleted within
a year. In this case, the company also has some free debt capacity of around
€45 million to €55 million for acquisitions between 2005 and 2010. Exhibit
17.9 plots the interest coverage against requirements under the base case, as
well as the free debt capacity for any acquisitions.

Step 4: Test capital structure under downside scenario But how would
the company get along if the business were to face a downturn of margins?
Would it go bankrupt or get into financial distress? To analyze this, we also
constructed a downside scenario in which margins are cut in half, to 2.5
percent of sales, for the next six years. The minimum coverage ratio of 2 is
the target for this scenario. Exhibit 17.10 on page 509 summarizes the projections of cash flows and key credit ratios. Of course, the financing deficit
and debt will shoot up, and coverage ratios will deteriorate. Nevertheless,
thanks to the equity issuance, the company has sufficient reserves to absorb
this risk and maintain a coverage ratio just above 2 times interest—even
under such an adverse business scenario. Given the opportunities to scale
down the growth plans if needed and reduce dividend payout ratios, the
company’s capital structure seems robust enough. Decreasing the dividend
payout ratios could improve the company’s cash position, but not by a great
amount in this case.
Step 5: Decide on current and future actions After several rounds of
testing and adjusting the capital structure plan under both scenarios, you select a final plan. The next step is to decide which elements of the financing
plan to carry out now and which to defer to a later stage, when new information is available. In this example, the current decisions under the financing
plan would involve the issuance of new equity. All future debt and dividend
decisions can be taken in a later stage, when circumstances are fully clear.
The cash from the equity issuance will ensure the company has enough
funding for at least six years under the base scenario, even allowing for

Exhibit 17.9 Capital Structure Summary for Base Case Scenario
Base case scenario (with equity issue)
EBITA/Interest coverage
29.9

10.0
9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0

6.8
6.0
4.9

6.2

Existing debt
Short-term debt
Excess debt capacity
Excess cash
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
–50
–100
–150

6.3

4.2
3.6

2006

2007

3.4

2008

3.5

3.6

2009

2010

125
101

54
93

80

60

130

–105

2005

30
159

46
184

53

30

10

0

2008

2009

2010

198

–9

2006

2007

€ million
Balance sheet
Working capital
Net PPE
Invested capital

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

158
315
473

181
362
543

217
435
652

239
478
717

251
502
753

264
527
791

(Excess cash)
Short-term debt
Existing debt
Equity
Investor funds

(105)
–
130
447
473

(9)
–
80
472
543

–
93
60
499
652

–
159
30
529
717

–
184
10
560
753

–
198
–
592
791

Cash flow statement
NOPLAT
Increase working capital
Increase net PPE
Free cash flow

36
(8)
(15)
13

41
(24)
(47)
(30)

49
(36)
(72)
(59)

54
(22)
(43)
(11)

57
(12)
(24)
21

60
(13)
(25)
22

Interest expense existing debt1
Debt repayment
Dividends
Cash flow existing financing
Funding surplus/deficit

(6)
(20)
(12)
(38)
(25)

(4)
(50)
(13)
(67)
(97)

(3)
(20)
(15)
(38)
(97)

(1)
(30)
(16)
(47)
(58)

0
(20)
(17)
(37)
(16)

–
(10)
(18)
(28)
(6)

Excess cash (increase) decrease
Interest income excess cash1
Equity issuance (repayment)
Debt issuance (repayment)
Interest expense new debt1
New funding

(105)
5
125
–
–
25

96
0
–
–
–
97

9
–
–
93
(4)
97

–
–
–
66
(8)
58

–
–
–
25
(9)
16

–
–
–
15
(9)
6

After-tax.

508

12.1
Without equity issue
Target

2005

1

Debt and debt capacity
(€ million)

Exhibit 17.10 Capital Structure Summary for Downside Scenario
Downside case scenario (with equity issue)
EBITA/Interest coverage

Existing debt
Short-term debt
Excess debt capacity
Excess cash

Target

10.1

10.0
9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0

Debt and debt capacity
(€ million)

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
–50
–100
–150

4.4
2.6

2005

2006

2007

2.3

2008

2.2

2009

2.1

2010

150

62
118

33
222

8
305

21
268

136
130

18
80

60

30

10

0

2008

2009

2010

(93)

2005

2006

2007

€ million
Balance sheet
Working capital
Net PPE
Invested capital

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

158
315
473

181
362
543

217
435
652

239
478
717

251
502
753

264
527
791

(Excess cash)
Short-term debt
Existing debt
Equity
Investor funds

(93)
–
130
435
473

–
18
80
446
543

–
136
60
456
652

–
222
30
466
717

–
268
10
475
753

–
305
–
485
791

Cash flow statement
NOPLAT
Increase working capital
Increase net PPE
Free cash flow

18
(8)
(15)
(5)

21
(24)
(47)
(50)

25
(36)
(72)
(84)

27
(22)
(43)
(38)

28
(12)
(24)
(7)

30
(13)
(25)
(8)

Interest expense existing debt1
Debt repayment
Dividends
Cash flow existing financing
Funding surplus/deficit

(6)
(20)
(6)
(32)
(36)

(4)
(50)
(6)
(59)
(110)

(3)
(20)
(5)
(28)
(112)

(1)
(30)
(5)
(37)
(75)

(0)
(20)
(5)
(26)
(33)

–
(10)
(5)
(15)
(23)

Excess cash (increase) decrease
Interest income excess cash1
Equity issuance (repayment)
Debt issuance (repayment)
Interest expense new debt1
New funding

(93)
4
125
–
–
36

93
–
–
18
(1)
110

–
–
–
119
(6)
112

–
–
–
85
(11)
(75)

–
–
–
46
(13)
33

–
–
–
38
(15)
23

1

After-tax.

509

510

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

acquisitions. The company can more easily attract any additional funding
after that period if the growth plans have paid off (and if the plans fail, no
further funding may be needed anyway). Under the downside scenario, the
equity proceeds alone may not be enough to keep a BBB rating but will still
allow the company to comply with dividend and debt commitments. Furthermore, in the downside scenario, growth plans should be tempered,
which will also reduce the financing deficit.

MAINTAINING A TARGETED CAPITAL STRUCTURE
When companies pursue long-term target leverage or coverage ratios, they
will find themselves sooner or later in a situation where they are so far above
or below their targeted leverage that they need to adjust their capital structure. For example, leverage may have gradually decreased as the company
used free cash flow to pay down debt according to the repayment schedule.
Companies must choose when and how to change their existing leverage
when they run into funding surpluses or deficits, for example if large investments are needed to pursue business growth or if divestments have generated large excess cash balances.
In these cases, a manager should ensure that the company’s capital
structure converges toward its long-term target level—but not necessarily
completely and immediately. Managers also must take account of transaction costs and signaling effects associated with different ways to adjust
the capital structure. As a result of such signaling effects and transaction
costs, companies cannot be expected to immediately correct their capital structures to long-term targets. Indeed, recent research has shown
that companies adjust their capital structure in a gradual and delayed
manner.36
Compared with signaling effects, transaction costs are easy to assess.
In general, equity issues are more expensive than bond issues, which in
turn are more expensive than bank loans. For all categories, there are
powerful economies of scale because the costs are largely fixed (see Exhibit 17.11). Thus, from a transaction-cost perspective, equity becomes effective only for larger amounts. For smaller funding amounts, bank loans
are the typical solution.

Signaling Effects from Capital Structure Decisions
For listed companies, the complication with capital structure decisions is
that they send the capital markets signals about a company’s prospects. Investors assume that managers possess more information than investors
36

See Leary and Roberts, “Do Firms Rebalance Their Capital Structures.” (Note 35)

MAINTAINING A TARGETED CAPITAL STRUCTURE

511

3.2
2.1
1.6

5.7

3.5
2.2
2.2

6.5

4.2
2.8
2.3

7.1

4.7
3.0
2.2

7.9

8.7

8.2
5.2
3.2
2.3

20–40

1.3

10–20

5.9
4.3

2.4

6.9
6.1

11.6

9.7

17.0

2.8

5

Equity-IPO
Equity-SEO1
Bonds-Convertible
Bonds-Straight

8.7
7.7

10

4.4

15

13.3

20

8.8

Total direct costs (Basis points)

Exhibit 17.11 Transaction Costs for Equity and Debt Financing

60–80

80–100

100–200

200–500

500+

0
2–10

40–60

Size of issue ($ million)
1

Seasoned equity offering.
Source: L. Inmoo, S. Lochhead, J. Ritter, and Q. Zhao, “The Costs Of Raising Capital,” Journal of Financial Research, 19(1) (1996): 59–74.
Analysis of transaction costs of around 4,500 equity and bond issues, 1990–1994.

have about the company’s true business and financial outlook. Of course,
managers can and do communicate directly with investors, but investors
tend to attach less credibility to words than to actions. Therefore, they
analyze management’s decisions on offerings or repurchases of debt and
equity and on dividends for any signals on the company’s financial
prospects. Managers should be aware of such signals before adjusting capital structure. However, keep in mind that although these signals may lead
to short-term price reactions, they do not increase or decrease intrinsic
value as such. Managers should ensure that sooner or later they can meet
any expectations they have set in the capital market. Signaling excessively
rosy prospects will ultimately backfire.
The signaling effects are in addition to the impact any capital structure
change may have in itself. For example, cutting dividends not only provides
a signal of lower future cash flows but also decreases leverage, thereby reducing tax shields on interest and giving management more slack in discretionary investments. Thus, the impact on share price is even more likely to
be negative.
There are some key trade-offs among alternative financing instruments
used to resolve funding shortages and surpluses. The trade-offs in handling
surpluses and deficits are fairly straightforward in principle. Increasing
leverage and returning cash to investors typically meets with positive market reactions. Decreasing leverage and asking investors for more capital
typically leads to negative price reactions.

Managing Funding Shortages
Consider three fundamental, alternative ways to resolve funding shortages:
cutting dividends, issuing new equity, or issuing new debt. Obviously,

512

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

companies can choose from many more instruments to raise cash, including
preferred stock, convertibles, warrants, and more exotic hybrid forms of
capital. However, the signaling impact of these instruments builds on the
essential trade-offs discussed here.
If a company already has too much debt, relative to its long-term leverage target, it probably has no alternative but to raise equity. If management
does have a choice, it should probably first consider issuing debt, which
has the least negative signaling effects. Equity comes second because of
more negative price reactions—and higher transaction costs unless large
amounts are raised. Dividend cuts are more a measure of last resort because
they send a negative signal to the capital markets, typically causing share
prices to fall substantially. This order of preference corresponds with recent
survey findings on how CFOs make capital structure decisions.37

Cutting dividends Cutting dividends naturally frees up funding for new
investments. But the stock market typically interprets dividend reductions
as a signal of lower future cash flows. As a result, share prices on average decline around 9 percent on the day a company announces dividend cuts or
omissions.38 Furthermore, some investor groups may count on dividends
being paid out every year, and skipping these dividends will force them to
liquidate part of their portfolio, leading to unnecessary transaction costs. Unless management has very compelling arguments for withholding dividends
to invest in future growth, investors are likely to react negatively to dividend
cuts. Some research indeed suggests that companies with more growth opportunities are less severely punished by the stock market.39 Finally, the
amount of funding freed up by cutting dividends is limited, so dividend cuts
alone are unlikely to resolve more substantial funding shortages.
Issuing equity Issuing equity also is likely to lead to a drop in share
prices in the short term. Typically, share prices decline by around 3 percent
on announcements of seasoned equity offerings.40 Because investors assume that managers have superior insights into the company’s true business and financial outlook, they believe managers will issue equity only if
a company’s shares are overvalued in the stock market. Therefore, the
share price will decrease in the short term on the announcement of an equity issuance, even if it is actually not undervalued.
37

See Graham and Campbell, “How Do CFOs Make Decisions?” (Note 17)
P. Healey and K. Palepu, “Earnings Information Conveyed by Dividend Initiations and Omissions,” Journal of Financial Economics, 21(2) (1988): 149–175.
39
L. Lang and R. Litzenberger, “Dividend Announcements: Cash Flow Signaling versus Free
Cash Flow Hypothesis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 24(1) (1989): 181–192.
40
See, for example, B. Eckbo, and R. Masulis, “Seasoned Equity Offerings: A Survey,” in Handbooks in Operations Research and Management Science 9, edited by R. Jarrow, V. Maksimovic, and
W. Ziemba (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1995); and C. Smith, “Invest ment Banking and the Capital
Acquisition Process,” Journal of Financial Economics, 15(1/2) (1986): 3 –29.
38

MAINTAINING A TARGETED CAPITAL STRUCTURE

513

Issuing debt A third way of resolving any funding shortage is issuing debt.
There is ample empirical evidence that investors interpret the issuance of
new debt much more positively than equity offerings. Because companies
commit to fixed future interest payments that can be withheld only at considerable cost, investors see the issuance of debt as a strong signal that future
cash flows will be sufficient. Investors also know that debt is more likely to
be issued when management perceives a company’s share price to be undervalued. As managers are assumed to be better informed on the company’s future, share prices typically respond less negatively than when new equity is
issued. Empirical research suggests that the price reaction is typically flat.41
Managing Funding Surpluses
As for funding deficits, we discuss only three basic alternatives for handling excess cash: dividend increases, share repurchases or extraordinary
dividends, and debt repayments. Assuming excess cash is not needed to pay
down debt to target levels, managers should probably first consider share
repurchases or extraordinary dividends, since these send a favorable signal
to capital markets. Voluntary debt repayments do not represent a positive
signal, unless the company is close to or in financial distress. Increasing the
dividend payout ratio provides the strongest signal. However, this is an attractive measure only if the company can indeed deliver against the investor
expectations for higher, ongoing dividends.
The major caveat in returning cash to investors concerns the market’s
growth expectations for the company in question. High-growth companies
could actually face negative reactions if the market interprets returning
cash as a signal of lower sustainable growth.

Dividend increases Companies increasing their dividends generally receive positive market reactions of around 2 percent on the day of announcement.42 For companies that initiate dividend payments, the impact
is even greater.43 In general, investors interpret dividend increases as good
news about the company’s long-term outlook for future earnings and cash
flows. On average they are right, according to the empirical evidence. Most
companies that increase their dividend payout usually do so after strong
41

See, e.g., W. Mikkelson and M. Partch, “Valuation Effects of Security Offerings and the Issuance Process,” Journal of Financial Economics, 15(1/2) (1986): 31–60; and Smith, “Invest ment
Banking and the Capital Acquisition Process.” (Note 40)
42
See, for example, S. Benartzi, R. Michaely, and R. Thaler, “Do Changes in Dividends Signal
the Future or the Past?” Journal of Finance, 52(3) (1997): 1007–1034; and J. Aharony and I. Swarey,
“Quarterly Dividends and Earnings Announcements and Stockholders,” Journal of Finance,
35(1) (1980): 1–12.
43
P. Healey and K. Palepu, “Earnings Information Conveyed by Dividend Initiations and Omissions,” Journal of Financial Economics, 21(2) (1988): 149–175.

514

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

earnings growth and when they are able to maintain these high earnings
levels in the year following the dividend increase. Companies that start paying dividends for the first time typically continue to grow their earnings at
high rates.
The drawback of increased dividends is that investors interpret this
action as a long-term commitment to higher payouts. As noted earlier, the
stock market severely penalizes companies for cutting dividends from
long-term payout levels. Managers should be confident that future cash
flows from operations will be sufficient to pay for capital expenditures as
well as higher dividends. In other words, dividend increases are useful to
handle structural cash surpluses but much less suited for a one-time surplus payout.
But higher dividends are not necessarily good news: they can also signal that companies have permanently lower future investment opportunities. This could actually lead to declining share prices if the stock market
had expected the company to continue to invest strongly in valuable
growth opportunities.

Share repurchases In the 1990s, share repurchases gained notable importance as an alternative way of distributing cash to shareholders. In 1999, for
example, share repurchases totaled $181 billion, close to the $216 billion in
regular dividend payments for companies listed on the New York Stock
Exchange.44 Even in the wake of the stock market downturn in 2000 major
companies in different sectors have continued to repurchase shares on a
large scale; examples include Unilever, Marks & Spencer, ExxonMobil,
IBM, and Viacom.
Investors typically interpret share repurchases positively for several
reasons. First, buying back shares indicates to investors that management
believes that the company’s shares are undervalued. If shares were overvalued, management should pay down debt instead, to return cash to the capital markets. If management itself buys back shares this effect is reinforced.
Second, a share buyback shows that managers are confident future cash
flows are strong enough to support future investments and debt commitments. Third, it signals that the company will not spend its excess cash on
value destroying investments. Fourth, share buybacks can result in lower
taxes for investors than dividend payments in countries where capital gains
are taxed at lower rates. In the United States this is the case for most investors, which partly explains the more prominent role of buybacks in the
United States than in some European countries. As we pointed out in Chapter 13, most companies’ share repurchases lead to an increase in earnings
per share (EPS). This is not why markets typically react positively, however.
44
See J. Pettit, “Is a Share Buyback Right for Your Company?” Harvard Business Review, 79(4)
(2001): (1) 141–147.

MAINTAINING A TARGETED CAPITAL STRUCTURE

515

It is the signaling, and not the EPS accretion, that matters. Empirical research shows that share prices on average increase 2 to 3 percent on the day
of announcement for “smaller” repurchase programs (i.e., less than 10 percent of shares outstanding are acquired through open-market transactions).45 For larger but far less frequent repurchase programs, in which
usually around 15 percent of shares are bought back through tender offers,
price increases are even stronger, at around 16 percent on announcement.46
In contrast to dividend increases, share buyback programs are not seen
as long-term commitments, so buybacks are more suitable for one-off cash
distributions. Sometimes companies have built up very high cash positions because of strong historical earnings combined with decreased investment opportunities. For example, in 2004 Microsoft announced that it
would repay a record $75 billion over the next four years in cash to its
shareholders, mostly in share repurchases. In other cases companies
end up with large cash balances after portfolio divestments, as IBM did
in the second half of the 1990s, and they used the cash proceeds to repurchase shares.
As an alternative to share repurchases, a company could declare an extraordinary dividend payout, as Microsoft did in 2004 as part of its cash return program. Microsoft paid out a significant portion in the form of an
extraordinary dividend because of its concern that the share repurchase
was so massive that it would swamp the liquidity in the market for Microsoft stock. The drawback of extraordinary dividends, compared with
share repurchases, is that the dividend forces the cash payout on all shareholders, regardless of their preferences for capital gains or dividends. A
share repurchase program at least leaves this decision to the shareholder,
who is in the best position to decide whether it would be more beneficial to
receive cash or hold on to capital gains.
Again, the risk in share repurchase programs and extraordinary dividends is that companies send a negative or at least ambiguous signal that
they have insufficient valuable growth opportunities. An interesting case
example is that of Merck, one of the largest pharmaceutical companies
worldwide.47 In 2000, it announced a $10 billion share repurchase, which
led to a 15 percent decline in share price in the next four weeks (although
the initial price reaction was favorable). Investors apparently assumed that
45
In smaller programs, companies typically buy their own shares at no premium or a limited
premium in so-called open-market purchases. Larger programs are often organized in the form
of tender offers in which companies announce that they will repurchase a particular amount of
shares at a significant premium. See, for example, R. Comment and J. Jarrell, “The Relative Signaling Power of Dutch-Auction and Fixed Price Self-Tender Offers and Open-Market Repurchases,” Journal of Finance, 46(4) (1991): 1243 –1272.
46
T. Vermaelen, “Common Stock Repurchases and Market Signaling: An Empirical Study,” Journal of Financial Economics, 9(2) (1981): 138–183.
47
For this and more examples of share repurchases, see Pettit, “Is a Share Buyback Right for
Your Company?” (Note 44)

516

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

Merck had been unable to find interesting research and development opportunities and could no longer maintain its long-term earnings growth
target of 20 percent.

Debt repayment The third option to reduce excess cash balances is to repay
debt, for example, by buying back corporate bonds in the market. Unless the
company needs to pay down debt to recover from financial distress, this typically does not meet with positive stock market reactions. First, it is hard to
interpret this as an indication of undervaluation of bonds or debt. Relative
to stocks, bonds are less likely to be undervalued unless the company is in financial distress. Thus, buying back bonds is more likely to indicate to
investors that management believes stocks are overvalued; otherwise, management should buy back shares. Second, it signals that future cash flows
may not be sufficient to support current levels of debt and that management
therefore needs to reduce the corporate debt burden now, while it has the
cash to do so. Third, as for all cash returns to investors, debt repayments
could signal a lack of investment opportunities.
Companies that are highly overleveraged should repay debt or buy back
bonds with any excess cash. This advice is consistent with our recommendation that whenever the deviations from long-term target leverage are
large, leverage corrections should be made regardless of any signaling effects. Interestingly, for financially distressed companies, buying back
bonds can also send a positive signal to the equity markets. For such companies, bond prices go up and down with the enterprise value, just as share
prices do. In this situation, a bond buyback could therefore also be a credible signal that management believes the bonds are undervalued (and because in this case bonds are similar to equity, this must also mean that
shares are undervalued). For example, when the Swiss-Swedish engineering company ABB announced a €775 million bond buyback in July 2004, its
share price increased 4 percent on the day of the announcement. The stock
market apparently saw the buyback as further evidence that the company
was on a trajectory to recover from an earlier financial crisis.

CREATING VALUE FROM FINANCIAL ENGINEERING
Financial engineering means different things to different people. We define
it pragmatically as managing a company’s capital structure for maximum
shareholder value with financial instruments beyond straight debt and equity. From this perspective, financial engineering represents more than
simply setting the most effective leverage or coverage level as we have discussed in this chapter so far. Financial engineering typically involves more
complex and sometimes even exotic instruments such as synthetic leasing,

CREATING VALUE FROM FINANCIAL ENGINEERING

517

mezzanine finance, securitization, commodity-linked debt, commodity and
currency derivatives, and balance sheet insurance. We will not discuss precisely what these instruments are or how they are typically applied. Instead, we will focus on the conditions under which financial engineering
can create real value for shareholders, as well as some caveats for financial
managers.
In general, companies can create much more value for shareholders in
their business activities than in financial engineering. As we pointed out in
Chapter 4, capital markets typically do a good job of pricing financial instruments, and companies will have difficulty boosting their share price by accessing so-called cheap funding, however complex the funding structures are.
Nevertheless, financial engineering can create shareholder value under
specific conditions. This can happen directly through tax savings or lower
costs of funding, but also indirectly, for example, by increasing a company’s
debt capacity so that it can raise funds to capture more value-creating investment opportunities. In the following section we consider three basic
forms of financial engineering: transferring company risks to third parties,
detaching funding from the company’s credit risk, and offering new riskreturn combinations in financing.

Derivatives
Derivative instruments—such as forwards, swaps, and options, for example—enable a company to transfer particular risks to third parties that can
carry these risks at a lower cost. In most cases, the derivatives companies
use involve currency and interest rate swaps.48 With such swaps, companies
convert their floating rate debt into fixed rate debt, and vice versa, or exchange particular currency cash flows into other currency denominations.
As a result, companies can reduce their risk of business erosion, lower their
cost of funding, and/or increase future tax savings.
McDonald’s Corporation used currency and interest swaps to effectively convert the dollar funding of some of its foreign operations to localcurrency-denominated debt.49 Most airlines hedge their fuel costs with
derivatives to be less exposed to sudden changes in oil prices. Of course,
this does not make airlines immune to prolonged periods of high oil prices
because the derivative positions must be renewed at some point in time. But
derivatives at least provide the airlines with some time to prepare business
measures such as cost cuts or price increases.
48

See, for example, G. Bodnar, G. Hayt, and R. Marston, “1998 Wharton Survey of Financial
Risk Management by U.S. Non-financial Firms,” Financial Management, 27(4) (1998): 70–91.
49
See the case description in C. Smithson, C. Smith, and D. Wilford, Managing Financial Risk: A
Guide to Derivative Products, Financial Engineering and Value Maximization (Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin,
1990): 271–275.

518

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

Derivatives can actually create shareholder value when carefully applied in such specific cases. But they are not relevant to all companies. In
general, derivatives are useful tools for financial managers when risks are
clearly identified, derivative contracts are available at reasonable prices because of liquid markets, and the total risk exposures are so large that they
could seriously harm a corporation’s health.
Companies should ensure that proper systems and procedures are in
place for managing and monitoring any derivative positions. Some highprofile scandals over the past 10 years involving, for example, Metallgesellschaft, Procter & Gamble, and Orange County, California, have
underlined the need for such caution.

Off-Balance-Sheet Financing
Off-balance-sheet financing includes a wide range of instruments such as
operating leases, synthetic leases, securitization, and project finance. Although the variety of these instruments is huge, they have the common element that companies effectively raise debt funding without carrying the
debt on their own balance sheet.
In some cases, a company raises the debt through a separate vehicle50
that has its own credit rating and credit terms. An example is the largescale securitization of customer receivables undertaken by Ford Motor
Company and General Motors. This securitization has effectively enabled
both companies to tap large sums of debt financing that otherwise would
have been difficult to obtain at similar terms.
Airlines are heavy users of off-balance-sheet financing in the form of
operating leases for their airplanes. Essentially, in this form of funding debt
is not just guaranteed by the airline but effectively backed with the plane.
Because airplanes are easy to seize and swap among different airlines, they
are good collateral for debt funding.
Off-balance-sheet financing can create shareholder value if it enables
companies to attract debt funding on terms that would have been impossible to realize for traditional forms of debt. Of course, this assumes that
there are enough value-creating investment opportunities for the company (which one may question in the case of the previous airline and automotive examples). This form of funding could make sense for companies
that have strong investment opportunities for profitable growth but
lack the strong current cash flow required for large amounts of debt funding. Examples are companies that need the funding to start up their
business, as in the case of companies building and running gas pipelines,
50
A so-called special-purpose entity (SPE) or, as it is referred to under U.S. GAAP, variableinterest entity (VIE).

CREATING VALUE FROM FINANCIAL ENGINEERING

519

toll bridges, or tunnels. They typically use project financing to raise
cash for the initial investments; then they pay the interest and principal
on the debt to the lender directly from the cash flows from future pipeline
revenues.
Some managers find off-balance-sheet financing attractive because it
reduces the amount of assets shown in the balance sheet and increases the
reported return on assets. That is not a good reason to engage in offbalance-sheet financing. Investors will see through accounting representations, as we discussed in Chapter 4. Furthermore, under the latest U.S.
GAAP and IFRS guidelines, many forms of off-balance-sheet financing
need to be consolidated and shown in the balance sheet (e.g., via the requirement of full consolidation of special-purpose entities).

Hybrid Financing
Hybrid financing involves forms of funding that share some elements of
both equity and debt. Examples are convertible debt and convertible preferred stock. In particular, convertible debt has been widely used in the
past decade. The total volume of convertibles issues worldwide amounted
to $145 billion in 2003—almost 8 percent of total new debt issuances in that
year.51
Convertible debt can make sense when investors or lenders differ from
managers in their assessment of the company’s credit risk.52 When the discrepancy is great, it may become difficult or even impossible to achieve
agreement on the terms of credit. In case of convertible debt, a company’s
credit risk has less impact on the credit terms. The key reason is that higher
credit risk indeed makes the straight-debt component of the convertible less
attractive and the warrant component more attractive. Overall, convertible
debt is less sensitive to differences in credit risk assessment and may therefore facilitate agreement on credit terms that are attractive to both parties.
This also explains why high-growth companies use this instrument much
more than other companies; they usually face more uncertainty about their
future credit risk.
Do not issue convertible debt because it has a low coupon. The coupon
is low because the debt also includes a conversion option. It is a fallacy to
think that convertible debt is “cheap” funding. Do not issue convertible
debt because it is a way to issue equity against the current share price at
some point in the future when share prices will be much higher. That value

51
D. Viazza and D. Aurora, “Global Convertibles to Decelerate from Torrid Pace,” Standard &
Poor’s Research Report, March 24, 2004.
52
See M. Brennan and E. Schwartz, “The Case for Convertibles,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 1(2) (1988): 55 –64.

520

CAPITAL STRUCTURE

is already priced into the conversion options. Furthermore, if the company’s share price does not increase sufficiently, the convertible debt will
not be converted to equity, and the company will end up with interestbearing debt instead.

SUMMARY
Although a poorly managed capital structure can lead to financial distress
and value destruction, capital structure is not a key value driver: For companies whose leverage is already at reasonable levels the potential to add
value is limited, especially relative to the impact of improvements in returns on capital and growth. Rather than fine-tuning for the “optimal” capital structure, managers should make sure the company has sufficient
financial flexibility to support its strategy while at the same time minimizing the risk of financial distress.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Define optimal capital structure. What is the relationship between
optimal capital structure, corporate value, and cost of capital?
2. Academics argue that every corporation has an optimal capital structure. Most firms have a debt position consistent to an S&P
financial risk rating between BBB and A. When you evaluate companies, you note that many companies carry essentially no long-term
debt and only a minimal short-term debt position in their capital
structure (Review the balance sheet of United Microelectronics and
Symantec). Provide an explanation as to why well-managed and
profitable companies appear to undervalue the benefits associated
with an optimal capital structure.
3. How does the concept of an optimal capital structure differ from an
effective capital structure?
4. The degree of financial risk is measured and reported by third-party
corporations such as Standard & Poors and Moody’s. What factors
do these companies evaluate when determining a company’s financial risk classification?
5. What is the primary benefit of a company in issuing debt to finance
its asset base? What is the primary cost associated with a company’s
debt position?

REVIEW QUESTIONS

521

6. Identify and quantify the relation between an increase in the debt
position of a company and its estimated cost of equity.
7. Outline a process a manager should employ to establish an effective
capital structure target.
8. Describe the importance of the pecking order theory for managing
the capital structure of a company as it relates to both short-term,
tactical financing decisions and long-term, strategic decisions.

18
Investor Communications
Previous chapters in Part Three explored how to measure value and manage a company to create value. The final element of value creation is ensuring that the company’s stock market price appropriately reflects its
potential for value creation.
CEOs and CFOs spend a large and growing portion of their time on investor communications, yet they are frustrated by the amount of time it absorbs and the nature of their interactions with investors. Executives are
obsessed with their company’s share price, and worry constantly that it
isn’t high enough, or that markets don’t understand their company sufficiently. They are also puzzled by the emergence of hedge funds, the growing number of analysts working directly for institutional investors, and the
increasingly short-term focus of sell-side analysts.
Until recently, companies have approached investor communications in
an ad hoc way. Executives receive advice from investor relations consultants, whose background is typically in public relations rather than finance. The academic community has only recently begun to research
investor composition and communications. In contrast, a systematic approach to investor communications has two primary benefits. First, it can
help align the market price of a company’s shares with the company’s intrinsic value. That alignment of share price and intrinsic value—and not
simply the highest possible share price—should be the objective of investor
relations. Second, a systematic approach helps executives communicate
with investors more effectively and efficiently.
If a company’s stock price exceeds its intrinsic value, it will eventually
decline as the company’s performance becomes evident to the market.
Too high a share price also may encourage managers to support the share
price by adopting short-term strategies, such as deferring investments or
Special thanks to Paul Adam, Yuri Maslov, and Jean-Hugues Monier for their support and insights on this chapter.

523

524

INVESTOR COMMUNICATIONS

maintenance costs that will lower long-term value creation. Then, when
the share price declines, employee morale suffers, and management must
face a concerned board of directors who may not understand why it
fell. Conversely, too low a share price has drawbacks, including takeover
threats, the unattractiveness of using shares for acquisitions, and possibly
demoralized managers and employees.
While the work in understanding investor communications is just beginning, some basic principles can guide companies:

• Investor communication strategy should be grounded in a thoughtful
analysis of market value relative to management’s careful estimate of
intrinsic value. Gaps between intrinsic value and market value are
rare, and these gaps often can be readily explained by factors unrelated to communications with investors.
• A company’s investment story should be consistent with its underlying strategy and performance. As obvious as this sounds, companies
sometimes do not line up their message with their strategy, especially in terms of how they allocate time talking about different business units or strategic initiatives.
• Companies are better off being transparent about performance and
the drivers of value (with some exceptions). Transparency includes
providing operating measures that the company uses to run its business, as well as financial results.
• Companies can improve investor communications (and sometimes
corporate strategies) by understanding their investor base, particularly how it compares with peers and whether it has changed in recent months or years. While there is no evidence that a particular
group of investors raises value or lowers volatility, insights from analyzing your shareholders can help you decide how senior executives
should spend their time and how to shape your message.

INTRINSIC VALUE VERSUS MARKET VALUE
Senior executives often claim that the stock market undervalues or “doesn’t
appreciate” their company. They say it not just in public settings, where you
would expect them to make that statement, but also in private. If only they
had different investors, their argument goes, or if only the investors or analysts better understood their company, then they would have a higher share
price. Yet, in some cases, these senior executives have not rigorously developed a perspective on what their company’s share price should be. Their belief is based on some high-level analysis of P/E ratios or some comment by

INTRINSIC VALUE VERSUS MARKET VALUE

525

an analyst that the shares are undervalued. But any good strategy must
begin with an honest assessment of the situation.
A strategy for investor communications must begin with an estimate of
the size, if any, of the gap between management’s view of the company’s intrinsic value and the stock market value. After some thoughtful analysis
and probing, we typically find that no significant gap exists, or that the gap
can be explained by the company’s historical performance relative to its expectations. We will illustrate using two disguised examples, which we call
Chemco and PharmaCo.

Chemco Example
Chemco, a large specialty chemicals company, has earned attractive returns
on capital, but its product lines are in slow-growth segments, so Chemco’s
revenue growth has been low. Chemco recently adopted a strategy to buy
small companies in faster-growing areas of the industry. The company intends to apply its manufacturing and distribution skills to improve the performance of the acquired companies. The faster-growth segments also have
higher returns on capital. Currently, 18 months since the company made its
first acquisitions under this strategy, 5 percent of Chemco’s revenues are
from the fast-growth segments.
Chemco’s managers were concerned that its shares’ price-to-earnings
ratio trailed the P/Es of many companies with which it compared itself.
They wondered whether “intangibles,” such as the company’s old-fashioned
name or the small number of analysts covering the industry, were the cause
of the low value.
We began to assess the value gap by helping management better understand Chemco’s value relative to its peers. First, some of the supposed peers
were 100 percent involved in the fast-growth segments, far more than
Chemco’s 5 percent of revenues from fast-growth segments. Also, some of its
peers were going through substantial restructurings, so current earnings were
very low. When we segmented Chemco’s peers, we found that its earnings
multiple was in line with its close peers (see Exhibit 18.1 on p. 526) but behind
the companies in the fast-growing segment. A third set of companies had high
multiples because of current low earnings due to restructurings. Exhibit 18.1
also shows that Chemco and its closest peers had lower ROICs and much lower
growth rates than the other companies. So, from a historical perspective,
Chemco’s value was aligned with its performance relative to its closest peers.
Next, we reverse engineered the share price of Chemco and its peers.
We built a DCF model and estimated the future performance consistent
with the current share price. Exhibit 18.2 on page 527 shows that if Chemco
grew its revenues at 2 percent per year at its most recent level of margins
and capital turnover, its DCF value would equal its current share price. This

526

INVESTOR COMMUNICATIONS

Exhibit 18.1 Chemco: Valuation in Line with Close Peers
Enterprise
value-to-EBITA

Organic growth
2001–2003 (percent)

ROIC 2003 (percent)

Chemco

8.6

20.5

2.0

California Co.

8.5

19.5

3.1

Texas, Inc.

8.0

Close peer
companies

Florida Associates

12.2

6.8

2.5
16.1

1.9

Peers in fastgrowth segments
Vermont, Inc.
Montana Co.

9.7

33.0

11.2

10.0

33.9

11.8

Restructuring
companies
Bretagne Co.
Normandy, Inc.

9.3

10.0
12.2

5.1

3.4
1.2

growth rate was in line with the implicit growth of its closest peers and
lower than the companies in the fast-growing segment.
Finally, we used a DCF model to value management’s announced growth
aspirations. If Chemco achieved its growth aspirations of 6 percent per year,
its DCF value would be $19 billion, suggesting a value gap of 36 percent relative to its current equity value of $14 billion. Thus, there was a gap between
management’s view of Chemco’s intrinsic value and its market value. But
could better communication close the gap? First, Chemco was valued in line
with its closest peers. Second, there was not much evidence that the strategy
would succeed. Chemco’s managers had been in place for at least five years
and had spent most of that time dealing with issues in its core business. The
new strategy required Chemco to grow faster than the industry in its core
businesses and to successfully acquire and integrate companies in fastergrowth product areas, a very difficult task. It is not surprising that the market
had adopted a wait-and-see attitude to rewarding Chemco for its new strategy.

PharmaCo Example
PharmaCo makes specialty pharmaceuticals and has been increasing
revenues at around 5 percent per year. PharmaCo’s managers believed the

ALIGNMENT OF MESSAGE AND STRATEGY

527

Exhibit 18.2 Chemco: Implicit Revenue Growth in Current Share Price
Using DCF Model, 2004–2014
percent
Chemco

2.0
Close peer companies

California Co.

1.0

Texas, Inc.
Florida Associates

3.0
2.0
Peers in fast-growth segments

Vermont, Inc.
Montana Co.

6.0
5.0

company was not “fairly valued” by the capital market. PharmaCo had a
strong product pipeline, with several products coming to market very
soon. Management and stock analysts alike expected 23 percent revenue
growth for the next three years. Management then expected 13 percent
per year for the following 10 years, and also expected to maintain its high
margins and ROIC.
The DCF value of PharmaCo’s management projections was $65 billion,
60 percent more than its market value of $40 billion. To determine the
source of this gap, we also valued PharmaCo’s closest peers. We used a DCF
model to estimate the long-term growth rates implicit in their share prices.
The implied long-term growth rate for PharmaCo was 12 percent per year,
while the implied long-term growth rate for its peers, ranged from 2 percent to 6 percent. So the market had already embedded in PharmaCo’s share
price a growth premium that was substantial relative to its peers, but not as
high as PharmaCo hoped. It is doubtful that better communication could
close the value gap, given PharmaCo’s already high valuation, both in absolute terms (12 percent expected growth) and relative to peers (twice the
expected growth of the next best company).

ALIGNMENT OF MESSAGE AND STRATEGY
It is not unusual to see a serious disconnect between a company’s value
creation strategy and its investor communications. For example, Exhibit
18.3 on page 528 shows an analysis of how MultiBusiness did not align its

528

INVESTOR COMMUNICATIONS

Exhibit 18.3 Multibusiness Communications Not Aligned with Value Drivers
percent
Share of 2003–2004
press releases
Business unit 1

Share of DCF value

20

90
46

Business unit 2

Share of 2003 sales
59

8

35

Business unit 3

17

1

3

Business unit 4

17

1

3

Total 100%

$20 billion

$3.7 billion

communications to investors by business unit with the value of the business units. Business Unit (BU) 1 was by far the biggest value creator, responsible for 90 percent of Multi’s value. Yet the company devoted only 20
percent of its communications to BU 1.
Effective investor communications should be grounded in a compelling
message that lines up with the value management expects to create. The message, or “investment story,” should help investors understand what the company stands for, how it differs from other companies, and why the prospects
of investing in the company are better than investing in its competitors or
even in different industries.
A compelling investment story has three key elements: aspirations,
strategy, and evidence. Aspirations define what the company wants to accomplish and should be described in financial terms and market terms. For
example, a company could define aspirations for revenue growth, profit
growth, and returns on capital, as well as market share, product innovation,
or customer penetration.
By definition, aspirations should be difficult to achieve, but investors
tend to be skeptical about aspirations that are wildly unrealistic, vague, or
not grounded in the economics of the industry. For example, companies
often have aspirations to increase earnings per share by 10 percent per year
(a number that CEOs seem enamored of) for the foreseeable future. Yet our
study of a sample of 1,056 companies found that only 16 percent were able to
earn 10 percent annual EPS growth 5 years in a row, and only 1 percent
earned 10 percent annual EPS growth 10 years in a row. Another problem
with an EPS aspiration is that it doesn’t differentiate between 10 percent
growth driven by share repurchases and expensive acquisitions, on one
hand, and an aspiration fueled by organic growth and productivity improvements, on the other hand.
Strategy explains how the company will reach its aspirations. It should
explain the company’s competitive advantages or unique corporate skills

HOW MUCH TRANSPARENCY?

529

and how those will translate into value creation. Returning to the Chemco
example, part of that company’s strategy for faster revenue growth was to
acquire companies in faster-growing segments. While growth through acquisitions is a strategy, Chemco’s investment story didn’t explain how its
acquisitions would create value, so the story wasn’t very compelling. When
pushed, Chemco’s management explained what the company had accomplished with the smaller, faster-growing acquisitions. They had substantially improved margins and return on capital through application of
superior manufacturing techniques that were unique to the industry and
through better working capital management. They also integrated the acquired companies’ distribution systems into theirs for substantial improvements. Explaining more completely how their acquisition strategy creates
value would make a much more compelling investment story.
Evidence helps investors assess whether a company’s strategy works to
achieve the declared aspiration. Evidence is not necessarily detailed disclosures, but it does include key success stories. A large and highly successful
industrial conglomerate had embarked on an ambitious strategy to accelerate organic growth. The company had a distinguished track record of operating excellence and earned exceptional returns on capital, but its focus on
ROIC had come at the cost of modest organic growth. The CEO established
a number of growth initiatives to change the organization’s mind-set toward organic growth. In his communications with the markets, the CEO
cited a range of evidence supporting his assertion that organic growth
would accelerate, including a large number of recently developed patents in
nanotechnology, recent customer successes with a new service model that
could be rolled out globally, and success in China at building a strong group
of local managers.

HOW MUCH TRANSPARENCY?
Despite the trend toward increasing transparency and disclosure after the
corporate scandals beginning in 2000 and the enacting of the SarbanesOxley legislation in the United States and similar reforms in Europe, companies still have tremendous latitude to decide what to disclose. Companies
need to decide their strategy for transparency and disclosure: will they
drive their industry toward greater transparency, or will they disclose as little as possible?
While legislation and accounting rules continue to require more transparency, much regulated transparency is not that useful because it is too
generic. Useful sorts of transparency typically arise more spontaneously
within an industry, often responding to explicit demands from investors or
the leadership of one or more industry pioneers. For example, in petroleum,
the industry has for many years published detailed fact books that describe

530

INVESTOR COMMUNICATIONS

oil production and reserves by geography, key parameters that investors
want to know when valuing petroleum companies. In pharmaceuticals,
companies provide detailed information about their product pipelines at
every stage of research and development. In these industries, companies
that failed to disclose what others disclose would not likely maintain the
market’s trust. In most industries, however, the level of disclosure and
transparency has been less standardized, so management must decide how
transparent to be.

Transparency for the Sake of Accurate Valuations
Greater transparency is likely to cause tighter alignment between management’s reasonable estimate of intrinsic value and the company’s stock price.
If investors better understand the drivers of historical and future performance, they can develop more accurate models of the business. For example, in retail, the common practice is to disclose information about the
number of stores and same-store sales growth. This information lets investors build models based on these variables and project future revenues
accordingly. Without the drivers of value, investors would be forced to extrapolate from historical performance. If investors don’t know whether a retailer’s sales grew from store growth or sales per store, they have to make
their own estimates in modeling the company’s performance.
Companies can increase transparency and valuation accuracy by improving their historical financial reporting and, most importantly, by reporting the underlying nonfinancial drivers of performance (referred to in
Chapter 13 as business health metrics).

Historical financial reporting As companies become larger and more complex, it is more difficult to interpret their historical financial performance
and forecast their future performance. Larger companies typically have
multiple business units, each with different growth, margins, and return on
capital. The overall results are often just averages that don’t help investors
understand the underlying performance of the companies. Investors like to
build up the value of the company as the sum of individual components. To
help investors understand complex companies, the U.S. GAAP and IFRS require companies to disclose performance by business unit, but companies
have significant flexibility in how they report business units.
As investors ask for better segment reporting, some companies are responding. For example, Microsoft reorganized its business unit reporting
in 2003 (for its 2002 results) to show more clearly the economics of its key
business activities. As Exhibit 18.4 illustrates, before 2002, Microsoft reported three business units: desktop and enterprise software, consumer
software and services, and consumer commerce. Many investors argued
that this segmentation was not helpful. Along with an internal reorganiza-

HOW MUCH TRANSPARENCY?

531

Exhibit 18.4 Microsoft®: New Segment Reporting
$ billion
2002 Segments1
Revenues

Operating profit

Desktop and
enterprise software

23.8

Consumer software
and services

14.7
(1.8)

3.5

Consumer commerce 0.2
investments

0.0

0.5

0.0

Other

2003 Segments1
Operating profit

Revenues

8.4

10.3

Client
Information
worker

7.0

9.2
7.1

Server and tools

2.5

Home and
entertainment

2.7

(0.9)

MSN®

2.0

(0.3)

Business 0.6
solutions

(0.3)

Mobility and 0.2
embedded devices

(0.2)

1

Excludes reconciling items or disposed businesses.
Source: Microsoft® annual reports.

tion, Microsoft shifted to a presentation along seven business lines that mirror the way the company is managed: client (essentially Windows- and PCrelated products), information worker (essentially Microsoft Office), server
and tools (products for servers), home and entertainment (mostly Xbox),
MSN, business solutions, and mobility-related products. In the new classification, the segments have clearly defined products and competitors. For example, Windows is the operating system for most personal computers and
faces a possible long-term threat from Linux. Microsoft Office leads the markets for spreadsheets, word processing, and presentation software. Both Windows and Office have profit margins greater than 75 percent. The Xbox line of
computer games competes with Sony and Nintendo and has yet to earn a
profit, as the product is young and the market highly competitive. MSN competes with companies like AOL and Google. It, too, has never earned a profit.
With this information about the business units, investors can assess the value
of each part of Microsoft and more accurately value the company.

532

INVESTOR COMMUNICATIONS

Exhibit 18.5 GlaxoSmithKline: Illustration of Disclosures
Historical financial reporting

• Revenue, profit and R&D spending by business unit
• Market share by therapeutic area

Current products

• Revenues by key products

Product pipeline

• Extensive description of compounds under development;
including development stage

Projections

• Revenue and profit projections by unit
• Revenue, prescription, and market share projections for top-selling products

Source: GlaxoSmithKine web site.

Underlying drivers of value In addition to transparency in financial reporting, investors want to know what drives the financial results. Reporting the underlying drivers of value is the most powerful way to help
investors assess the value of a company’s shares. As we mentioned earlier,
the underlying drivers will vary from company to company, and from industry to industry, but investors want to understand the drivers of revenues, costs, and capital. For revenues, they want to know how big the
market is, what new products are in the pipeline, how well the company develops new products, and what market share the company has achieved. For
costs, investors want to know how well the company is driving down costs
compared with competitors. Similarly, they want to know how much capital
will be required to achieve future revenue growth.
Retailers provide some of these answers when they disclose the number
of stores and same-store sales growth. When they also report sales per
square foot, investors can monitor the impact of changes in store size and
configuration. Mobile-telephone companies typically disclose information
about their customer base, such as number of subscribers and average revenue per subscriber. In the pharmaceutical industry, Exhibit 18.5 shows
some of the disclosure by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), an industry leader. GSK
details its results by therapeutic area (e.g., cardiac drugs versus gastrointestinal drugs), describes drugs in its pipeline, and projects market share
and revenues for each major product.
Concerns about Transparency
Many companies dislike transparency. They believe the market is only concerned about smooth growth in earnings per share (EPS), regardless of how
companies achieve it. Many managers also believe that transparency reduces their flexibility. They like to be able to use good results from one

HOW MUCH TRANSPARENCY?

533

Exhibit 18.6 Tail Effects Drive Reaction to Earnings Surprises

Percent change in stock price

Unanticipated with tail

–100

–80

–60

–40

–20

0

–60

–40

–20

0

Percentage decline in EPS

Percent change in stock price

Unanticipated with no tail

–100

–80

Percentage decline in EPS

Source: The Wall Street Journal 3rd quarter 2000 earnings announcements; McKinsey analysis.

business unit to offset bad results from another, or time asset sales to offset
good or bad quarters. But as we showed in Chapter 4, investors are smarter
than that, responding to the causes of good or bad results as much as the results themselves. For example, some of our colleagues looked at a sample of
companies that did not meet expectations for quarterly earnings. They classified companies by whether or not the problem was likely to persist (did it
have a “tail”?). As shown in Exhibit 18.6, the market did not respond blindly
to the earnings announcement. The market responded much more mildly
when there was evidence that the negative earnings were due to a one-time
event, not something that would affect future results.
Companies are getting more comfortable with greater transparency. Indeed, some are embracing it. For example, when Microsoft began reporting
along its new business units, it was compelled to disclose how much it had
invested through operating losses in Xbox, MSN, and other new products.
In a recent interview, John Connors, the company’s former CFO, said, “It
was surprising how many people within the company didn’t really understand how intensely analysts, investors and the press would follow each of

534

INVESTOR COMMUNICATIONS

the seven businesses.” The new reporting also helped improvements in internal management processes; it “forced some improvements in resource
allocation.”1
There is an important and valid argument against too much transparency: disclosing too much may help a company’s competitors, customers,
and suppliers. For example, customers with knowledge of a product line’s
profitability could use that information to negotiate lower prices. If competitors see how profitable a product is, will that give them information to compete differently, by price, shifting to more profitable lines, or mimicking the
more successful company’s actions? In other words, do you want competitors to know much about the exciting new product you will be introducing in
18 months?
In our experience, however, a company’s competitors, customers, and
suppliers already know more about your business than you might expect. For
example, there is a cottage industry of photographers who search for new car
models that the automotive manufacturers have not yet formally acknowledged. In addition, your competitors talk regularly to your customers and
suppliers, who won’t hesitate to share information that may help them. Companies must carefully assess how transparency will affect them competitively.
In some situations, companies might use transparency to gain an advantage over their competitors. Suppose a company has developed a new
technology, product, or manufacturing process that management feels sure
will give the company a lead over competitors. Furthermore, managers believe competitors will be unable to copy the innovation. At a strategic level,
disclosing the innovation might discourage competitors from even competing if they believe the company has too great a lead. From an investor’s
perspective, disclosure of the innovation could increase the company’s
share price relative to its competitors, thus making it more attractive to potential partners and key employees, and could reduce the price of stockbased acquisitions.
The transition to more transparency can be difficult. Some companies
that have not been transparent are pondering whether to change. These are
often strongly performing companies with good track records. Over many
years, their track record (often steady earnings increases) has permitted
them to rebuff investors’ demand for more transparency. But, after years of
success, growth slows as the business matures or markets become more
competitive. In one situation, a large company did not disclose that most of
its profits came from aging, low-growth products with a large installed
base while its newer high-growth products were far less profitable due to
competition and new technologies. In another case, a consumer products
company kept its earnings growing by selectively reducing investments in
1
Bertil Chappuis and Timothy Koller, “Finance 2.0: An Interview with Microsoft ’s CFO,”
McKinsey on Finance, 14 (2005), pp. 7–13.

KNOW YOUR INVESTORS

535

advertising and promotion. Because of the companies’ long histories of success, sudden new transparency would surely cause stock prices to decline.
Academic research suggests that when these companies fall, they fall hard.2
Executives at these companies need to decide whether their current
predicament is temporary and short-lived, or whether their days of strong
growth and high returns are over. If the latter, they clearly need a quick
transition plan. If the former, they need to assess whether they should hold
off on transparency and the pain it will cause until they have returned to
their growth path.

Earnings Guidance
Should companies provide earnings guidance? Earnings guidance is a relatively recent phenomenon. In the United States, companies began providing
guidance only after the SEC issued safe-harbor guidelines in 1995. According to a survey of analysts, earnings guidance is not that important.3 Indeed, this survey showed that EPS forecasts rank as number 30 in a list of 33
most important aspects of financial disclosure to investors and analysts.
There have been no published articles on whether earnings guidance affects
the valuation of companies. Recently, however, a number of prominent companies stopped providing guidance. The market’s reaction has been mixed.
Reviewing some of the key cases, it appears that the market responded negatively to the discontinuance of guidance for companies that otherwise
lacked credibility and had unclear strategies and poor disclosures. The
market responded positively for companies whose management enjoyed
high credibility (as determined by analyst comments) and where the company provided additional business metrics to help investors understand the
company’s economics.

KNOW YOUR INVESTORS
Does it matter who your investors are? It is not clear whether one investor
base is better than another. But understanding the company’s investor base
can give managers insights that might help them anticipate how the market
will react to important events and strategic actions, as well as help managers
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of their investor relations activities.
While we often read about managers wanting their company to be perceived a certain way, there is no systematic evidence that one investor base
2
Douglas J. Skinner and R. G. Sloan, “Earnings Surprises, Growth Expectations, and Stock Returns” (working paper, 2002). See also Linda A. Myers and Douglas J. Skinner, “Earnings Momentum and Earnings Management” (working paper, 2002).
3
Association for Invest ment Management and Research, Member Survey of Global Corporate
Finance Reporting Quality and Corporate Communication and Disclosure Practices, October
2003 (772 respondents).

536

INVESTOR COMMUNICATIONS

is better than another. For example, most companies prefer to be considered
“growth” stocks rather than “value” stocks. Growth stocks are defined as
having high P/Es relative to value stocks. In our experience, most value
stocks have low P/Es because they are mature, slow growers and/or because they earn low returns on capital. Probably, managers can’t do anything about this. Companies are constrained by what they are. Likewise,
companies with upcoming volatile news will attract investors who like to
bet on such news.

Investor Groups and Analysts
In general, managers should devote their communication energy to the investors who matter: those who will affect their share price. In general, these
are likely to be large institutional investors.

Retail investors Our colleagues Kevin Coyne and Jonathan Witter4 found
that, for the most part, retail investors act randomly enough that they rarely
create the trading imbalances necessary to move stock prices significantly.
But when retail investors act in unison, they can move a company’s share
price—for example, in response to a major event like an acquisition or CEO
change. Similarly, others have found that the share prices of companies
with more institutional investors moved faster in response to earnings surprises.5 More important than the ratio of retail to institutional investors,
however, was the investment style of institutional investors.
Sell-side analysts Traditionally, companies spent the greatest amount of
time communicating to sell-side analysts (analysts who work for brokerage
firms). One survey suggested that 53 percent of company time was devoted
to sell-side analysts.6 These analysts provide information to investors about
their analysis, either selling their research or providing it free in return for
trading commissions.
However, the importance of sell-side analysts is diminishing, partly because of the conflict-of-interest scandals early in the decade, but more importantly because institutional investors are learning to analyze companies
on their own. There has been a steady increase in the number of analysts
who cover stocks in-house, estimated at 5 percent growth per year.7 In 2003,
60 percent of surveyed asset management companies declared that they plan
to add to their in-house research capabilities.8 Investors are becoming less
4
Kevin Coyne and Jonathan Witter, “Taking the Mystery out of Investor Behavior,” Harvard
Business Review (September 2002).
5
Edith Hotchkiss and Deon Strickland, “Does Shareholder Composition Matter? Evidence from
the Market Reaction to Corporate Earnings Announcements” (working paper, unpublished).
6
Institutional Investor Research Group, “The European Equities Market Report,” March 2004.
7
Unpublished McKinsey research.
8
“Global Broker Survey: Putting a Price on Independence,” Global Investor (September 2003).

KNOW YOUR INVESTORS

537

trusting of sell-side research because it is still dominated by buy recommendations, although you would expect a rough balance of buy and sell recommendations if analysts were unbiased. According to the Zack’s database of
analysts’ recommendations, in February 2005, of 27,000 ratings the ratio of
buy to sell recommendations was 5 to 1 (40 percent buy, 52 percent hold, and
8 percent sell).
Many companies have recognized the declining importance of sell-side
analysts. A recent survey by Institutional Investor highlighted that the majority of companies plan to increase time allocation to the buy-side analysts
working for institutional investors.9 In recent conversations, some corporate
executives have commented that sell-side analysts seem more focused on
short-term results while institutional investors (and their analysts) are
more likely to ask about longer-term strategic issues. Part of this may be due
to the emergence of hedge funds, often the largest clients of the brokerage
firms that employ the sell-side analysts. Many hedge fund clients are most
interested in short-term news that they can use with their trading strategies.

Hedge funds Hedge funds are relatively small in absolute terms, but estimates suggest that they accounted for 25 to 30 percent of market turnover in
2002.10 Additionally, hedge funds are growing fast; their global assets grew
at a staggering 26 percent annually between 1990 and 2003.11 Unfortunately
for managers, hedge funds don’t disclose their holdings or investment
strategies. Not surprisingly, one of the most frustrating investor communication experiences is dealing with hedge funds, often because hedge funds
focus on near-term events. As a result, many companies tend to ignore them
in their communications as an “alien” type of investor that tends to drive
volatility and put downward pressure on stock performance.
However, once a company has diagnosed hedge funds as one of those individual large-mover shareholders that matter (or even once hedge funds
cumulatively hold a large proportion of the company’s stock), the company
needs to better understand these funds’ investment motivations and information needs.
Understanding Institutional Investors
Analyzing a company’s investor base or identifying potential attractive investors is currently far more art than science. Most of the effort of investor
communications rightly focuses on the institutional investors that hold the
most shares. In the United States, institutional investors must file information about their portfolios with the SEC every quarter, so they are easy to
identify and analyze.
9

“Global Broker Survey: Rethinking the Research Model,” Global Investor (September 2004).
ITG, Inc., “ITG, Inc. to Acquire Hoenig Group, Inc.,” news release, September 27, 2002.
11
Hedge Fund Research, Inc., “HFR Year End 2003 Industry Report,” 2004.
10

538

INVESTOR COMMUNICATIONS

Institutional investors are typically classified by investment style. For
example, Thomson Financial examines the portfolios of institutional investors along three dimensions: (1) the portfolio’s forward P/E relative to
the S&P 500, (2) the indicated dividend yield relative to the S&P 500, and (3)
the three- to five-year projected EPS growth rate relative to the S&P 500.
Based on this analysis, Thomson identifies a “dominant” style for each investor: momentum, aggressive growth, growth, core growth, growth at a
reasonable price (GARP), core value, deep value, income value, yield, or
index. However, institutional investors often have multiple funds, under
different fund managers. You need to understand the styles of the individual fund managers, not the overall style of the parent group.
The Thomson styles are typical for the investment industry, but their
usefulness is still questionable. Take, for example, value investors versus
growth investors. At the highest level, growth investors are classified as investors who invest in companies with higher than average P/E ratios (the
opposite of value investors). Yet as we showed in Chapter 3, many companies have high P/E ratios because they have high returns on capital, not
because they are growing particularly fast.
Instead of classifying investors this way, Coyne and Witter propose
comparing investors along two dimensions: their horizon of analysis and
the dominant content being analyzed.12 Along the first dimension, they
group investors into four categories:
1. Fundamental analysts have the longest horizons and base investment
decisions on a comparison between a stock’s current price and its estimated intrinsic value based on the company’s long-term (five years
or more) outlook.
2. News forecasters are interested in whether some strategic event will
occur within 12 to 18 months and affect the value of the company’s
shares. They make buy or sell decisions based on predictions of these
news events.
3. Event bettors have the shortest horizons. They focus on buying or selling ahead of specific news such as earnings predictions or the outcome of an important sale or product announcement.
4. Passive investors are typically indexers who hold a company because it
is part of an index or sector, or they have a relationship with the company and are unlikely to trade frequently.
Along the dimension of content being analyzed, Coyne and Witter identify
three types of investors:
12

See Coyne and Witter, “Taking the Mystery out of Investor Behavior.” (Note 4)

KNOW YOUR INVESTORS

539

1. Organization mavens focus on people issues within the company, particularly changes in top management and their assessment of the
quality of management.
2. Strategy junkies focus on strategy and operations, asking questions
about products and competitive advantages.
3. Financial addicts focus on financial measures, such as earnings
and margins.
Coyne and Witter’s classification leads to 12 combinations. It would be
difficult to craft 12 different messages, one for each type of investor, but a
company could craft different messages along the dimension most relevant
to its situation. For example, a company could craft a long-term strategy
message for the fundamental investors and a message around upcoming
news for the news forecasters.
Classifying investors helps a company understand how it may be
viewed by the market. For example, a company can analyze how its investor
base has changed and how it compares with that of peer companies. Exhibit
18.7 shows an analysis of PharmaCo’s investors. Currently, PharmaCo has

Exhibit 18.7 PharmaCo: Analysis of Investor Base
Change in PharmaCo
investor base
Percent, in millions,
over Q2 03–Q3 03

Current shareholder base by investment philosophy
Percent of disclosed free float

15

9

11

9

7

100% (mm) =
Passive/
relationship

33.5

34.7

14

6
2

13
Event betters

19
26

23

23
18

30
30
23
31

26

News forecaster

27

27
69
50
36

50
41

41
Fundamental
analysis

28

PharmaCo

Gators

Spartans

Bruins

Boilers

Buyers

Sellers

540

INVESTOR COMMUNICATIONS

Exhibit 18.8 Newtech: Investor Base Statistical Analysis
Standard deviations from mean
2

1

1

2
2.5

Yield
1.7

Size
Historical earnings to price

1.0

Estimate revisions model

0.9

Predicted earnings to price

0.9

Trading activity

0.8

Cash flow to price

0.8

Earnings momentum

0.5

Historical alpha

0.5

Estimate changes

(0.2)

Growth/value

(0.2)

Residual reversal

(0.3)

Sector momentum

(0.4)

Dividend discount model

(1.0)

Neglect

(1.0)

Relative strength model

(1.1)

Cash flowback

(1.8)

Newtech investors have
favored high dividend yields

Two-thirds of factors are
within one standard
deviation of the mean

Source: Thomson Financial.

more short-term-oriented investors (event bettors). This skew toward shortterm investors has developed only over the last six months, perhaps as a result of PharmaCo moving out of the price range that fundamental analysts
are comfortable paying. PharmaCo might expect, then, that once its string
of good news dries up, the investor base will shift back to the peer norm.
Thomson also does a statistical analysis of company characteristics relative to their investor base to quantitatively identify unique issues that a
company should be attuned to. For example, Exhibit 18.8 shows an analysis
of Newtech. According to Thomson’s analysis, Newtech’s investors are
heavily skewed to investors who prefer high dividend yields. Newtech is a
mature company whose core business is about to be eclipsed by new technologies. Newtech has been developing a strategy to transition to the new
technology, building on its strong brand and marketing skills. The new

KNOW YOUR INVESTORS

541

strategy will require a substantial investment, and Newtech has been considering reducing its dividend to fund its investment. With its investor base
analysis, Newtech knows that its core investors may decide to sell when the
new strategy is announced. This does not mean Newtech should change its
decision, but it should be prepared for a possible sell-off by the dividendoriented investors and prepare its board for a possible short-term price decline until the new strategy attracts investors with confidence in it.

Which Investors Matter
The analysis in the previous section focuses on classes of investors, rather
than individual investors. What matters, of course, are the marginal investors. At any point in time, investors will have a wide range of opinions
about the value of a company’s shares, varying not just by 10 percent or 20
percent from the current share price, but sometimes by 200 percent or more.
The investors with the highest estimates aren’t likely to sell soon, just as the
investors with the lowest estimate aren’t likely to buy soon. The marginal
investors are those who would buy if a bit of good news or some new insight
into the company convinced them to increase their estimated value relative
to the current share price, as well as those who would sell at a hint of bad
news. Theoretically, these investors are the ones that matter and should be
the focus of management’s attention. The problem is that it is hard to identify these investors.
Coyne and Witter looked at the trading behavior for companies in the
S&P 500. According to their study, in the quarter following a major announcement by a company, about 70 percent of company-specific changes in
stock price (that is, changes that occurred in addition to movements in the
sector or market overall) could be explained by the decisions of the 40 to 100
most active investors in the company. These shareholders are not necessarily the largest ones. Some large shareholders are passive, index investors or
may be interested in the sector as a whole, rather than the specific company.
To identify key marginal investors, Coyne and Witter suggest the following approach: First, identify the following groups of investors:
• Large investors who have recently made significant purchases of
your shares
• Large past investors who have recently bought back into your company
• Small current investors that could increase their holdings substantially or trade very actively
• Potential movers who currently trade in your peers but not you
Next, analyze the trading patterns of these investors. When do they buy/sell?
When do they buy/sell your peers? Do they gradually build or reduce positions

542

INVESTOR COMMUNICATIONS

or move quickly to accumulate or sell shares? How overweight/underweight
in your company is their portfolio relative to your peers? You could also (with
caution about selective disclosure) interview them to understand their actions, specifically asking what aspects of your company they focus on. For example, in one case, Coyne and Witter found that more than 35 percent of a
company’s investors valued only two of its divisions.
Once you understand your investors, you will be in a better position to
decide how your communications will vary across investors and how to allocate your time to different investors. For example, price-insensitive investors, such as index funds, don’t require any specific communications
strategy. Fundamental analysts (using Coyne and Witter’s terminology)
should be targeted with clear descriptions of strategies and key value drivers. News forecasters should be kept up-to-date on near-term events. Finally, you might develop individual account plans for the top 25 to 50 most
important (not necessarily largest) investors or potential investors, taking
into account their specific investment style, trading practices, and investment objectives.
It is easy to see that if you give “fundamental investors” a clear strategy
with evidence, backed up with appropriate transparency, you can narrow
the range of value estimates and, therefore, have a stock price that tracks intrinsic value more closely and with less volatility. However, given our current state of knowledge, it is less clear how to communicate with news
forecasters or event bettors—and, more importantly, whether doing so
makes a difference.

SUMMARY
The issues around investor communications will remain unresolved for
some time. Traditionally, there have been two camps: those who believe you
can “talk up” your share price and those who believe companies shouldn’t
spend much time or effort on investor communications because it won’t
make a difference. Most likely, the answer lies somewhere in the middle.
Certainly, investors can more accurately value a company if they have the
right information. Also, even if you can talk up the stock, it may not be the
best thing for the company in the long run.
Regardless of which camp you are in, you can improve the alignment of
your company’s value with its intrinsic value by applying some of the systematic approaches we have described for understanding your value, understanding your current and potential investors, and communicating with
investors. These principles also can help managers use their scarce time for
investor communications more efficiently and effectively.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

543

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. The general consensus among academics is that the capital markets
are efficient. If the capital markets are efficient, identify the potential value gained by having management establish an effective investor communications department?
2. Identify and describe the key elements of a well-defined investment
story.
3. Compare and contrast intrinsic value to market price. If the capital
markets are efficient, what should be the relationship between intrinsic value to market price?
4. Define the term transparency as it relates to corporate investor communications. What is the importance of corporate transparency?
Would increased transparency have led the market to different conclusions regarding value for companies involved in recent accounting
scandals, such as Adelphia?
5. If transparency is a significant benefit, identify where too much
transparency might lead to a reduction in corporate value. Consider
in your answer how too much transparency could lead to a decline in
a firm’s competitive position and enterprise value.
6. What are hedge funds? Why is it important that management understand both the motivation behind and the informational needs of the
hedge fund industry?
7. Should the investment story be crafted to the interests of each specific investor group or should there be a consistent investment story
that applies to all investors? Explain.
8. Why should managers consider the marginal investor of the company’s common equity the main focus of their attention? How might
management identify the marginal investor?

Part Four

Advanced Valuation Issues

19
Valuing Multibusiness
Companies
Most large companies are in multiple businesses. Some companies are quite
diverse; at General Electric, for instance, business units are dedicated to
products as varied as jet engines, light bulbs, and consumer appliances. Even
companies with a narrower focus, such as consumer products, often compete
in multiple segments (Procter & Gamble’s beauty products, laundry detergent, pet food, and pharmaceuticals). If each business unit’s financial characteristics (growth and return on capital) are significantly different, it is
best to analyze and value each unit separately and then sum the parts to estimate the value of the entire company.
But is this process economically sound? Is the value of a diversified
business truly the sum of its parts? Over the years, practitioners and academics have debated whether there is a “conglomerate or diversification discount.” In other words, does the market value conglomerates at less than
the sum of their parts? Unfortunately, the results are incomplete. There is
no consensus about whether diversified firms are valued at a discount1 relative to a portfolio of pure plays in similar businesses. Some argue they may
even trade at a premium. Among studies that claim a discount,2 there is no
consensus about whether the discount results from the weaker performance
of diversified firms relative to more focused firms, or whether the market
values diversified firms lower than focused firms. In our experience, however, whenever we have examined a company valued less than pure-play
Special thanks to S. R. Rajan, who co-wrote this chapter.
1
P. Berger and E. Ofek, “Diversification’s Effect on Firm Value,” Journal of Financial Economics,
37 (1995): 39–65; and B. Villalonga, “Diversification Discount or Premium? New Evidence from
Business Information Tracking Series,” Journal of Finance, 59(2) (April 2004): 479–506.
2
A. Schoar, “Effects of Corporate Diversification on Productivity,” Journal of Finance, 57(6) (2002):
2379–2403; and J. Chevalier, “ What Do We Know about Cross-Subsidization? Evidence from the
Invest ment Policies of Merging Firms” (working paper, University of Chicago, July 1999).

547

548

VALUING MULTIBUSINESS COMPANIES

peers, it was because the company’s business units had lower growth
and/or returns on capital relative to pure-play peers. In other words, there
was a performance discount, not a diversification or conglomerate discount.
Valuing a multibusiness company by its parts follows the same principles we described in Part Two, with the following unique issues:
• Creating business unit financial statements
• Estimating cost of capital for each business unit
• Valuing each business separately, summing the parts, and interpreting the results

CREATING BUSINESS UNIT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
To value a company’s individual business units, you need income statements, balance sheets, and cash flow statements. Ideally, these financial
statements should approximate what the business units would look like
if they were stand-alone companies. Creating the financial statements
for business units requires consideration of five issues: allocating corporate
overhead costs, dealing with intercompany transactions, dealing with intercompany receivables/payables, valuing financial subsidiaries, and dealing with incomplete information when valuing listed companies with
limited disclosures.

Corporate Costs
Most multibusiness companies have shared services and corporate overhead, so you need to decide which costs should be allocated and which retained at the corporate level. For services that the corporate center provides,
such as payroll, human resources, and accounting, allocate the costs by
cost drivers. For example, the aggregate cost of human resource services
provided by the corporate parent can be allocated by the number of employees in each business unit. When costs are incurred because the units
are part of a larger company (for example, the CEO’s compensation or the
corporate art collection), you typically should not allocate the costs. They
should be retained as a corporate cost center and valued separately for two
reasons: First, allocating corporate costs to business units reduces the
comparability with pure-play business unit peers that don’t incur such
costs (most business units have their own chief executives, CFOs, and controllers who are comparable to pure-play competitors). Second, keeping
the corporate center as a separate unit reveals how much of a drag it creates on the company value.
Typically, corporate costs for multibusiness-unit firms are 1 to 2 percent
of revenue but about 10 to 20 percent of the operating profit. Hence, the

CREATING BUSINESS UNIT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

549

negative value contribution of these costs tends to be on the same order of
magnitude, or about 10 to 20 percent of the total enterprise value of the firm.

Intercompany Sales
Sometimes business units provide goods and services to one another. To arrive at consolidated corporate results, accountants eliminate the internal
revenue and costs to prevent double counting. Only revenue and costs from
external sources remain at the consolidated level. Exhibit 19.1 demonstrates
how intersegment transactions are accounted for. Unit A provides $100 of
widgets to Unit B and recognizes the revenue received and corresponding
EBITA. Unit B then installs additional parts on the widgets and resells them
to external customers. Assume, however, only 80 percent of the transferred
widgets are processed and resold that period. The remaining 20 percent is
added to Unit B’s inventory at the preprocessing cost ($20). And since the
inventoried units have not been sold, they remain on the balance sheet of
Unit B. To consolidate the income statement, we eliminate Unit A’s internally generated revenue of $100 and the $80 in Unit B’s cost of goods sold.
The net effect eliminates $20 in gross profit for the consolidated financials.
In most situations, this inventory effect is small, because the EBITA impact
is driven by the change in inventory, not the ending inventory. In any case,
the impact on EBITA does not affect free cash flow, because the EBITA impact is offset by the change in inventory.
When you build and forecast the financial statements for the business
units, treat the eliminations as a stand-alone business unit similar to the
corporate center. This means as you project individual business unit
growth rates, you need to estimate whether intercompany sales will grow
as well. The growth rate of intercompany sales can be estimated from the
details of how and why these items arise. It is simplest to assume that the
eliminations grow at the same rate as the business as a whole. Remember,
however, the eliminations are used only to reconcile business unit forecasts

Exhibit 19.1 Intercompany Eliminations with Timing Differences
$
External revenues
Internal revenues

Unit A
500
100

Unit B
414

Total revenues
COGS

600
(540)

Gross profit

60

Eliminations
(100)

Consolidated
914
–

414
(290)

(100)
80

914
(750)

124

(20)

164

Comments
Eliminate intercompany
revenue
Eliminate profit on
intercompany sales

550

VALUING MULTIBUSINESS COMPANIES

to the consolidated-enterprise forecasts and do not affect the value of the
company or the individual business units.
In addition, to accurately value each business unit, you should record
intercompany transfers at the value that would be transacted with third
parties. Otherwise, the relative value of the business units will be distorted.

Intercompany Receivables and Payables
Multibusiness companies typically manage cash and debt centrally for all
business units. Business units with positive cash flow typically forward all
cash generated to the corporate center, sometimes setting up an intercompany receivable from the corporate parent. Units with negative cash flow receive cash from the parent to pay their bills, setting up an intercompany
payable to the parent. These intercompany receivables and payables are not
like third-party receivables and payables and therefore should not be
treated as part of operating working capital. They should be treated like intercompany equity in the calculation of invested capital.
Exhibit 19.2 demonstrates how this is done. The consolidated firm consists of two businesses: the parent (P) and a subsidiary (S). P has invested
$25 in S’s equity, recorded as an equity investment. (This accounting treatment is for internal reports only; since P entirely owns S, the two companies
must consolidate their statements for external reports.) P has also lent $20
to S, which shows up as an intercompany receivable for P and an intercompany payable for S. It would be a mistake to treat this amount as part of the
working capital of either P or S. For P, it represents a nonoperating asset
that does not generate operating profits, and hence should not be included
in P’s operating working capital. For S, it represents a financial infusion
that is similar to equity, so it is part of S’s financing structure but not its
working capital. The internal receivable in P’s balance sheet should be
treated as an equity investment in S, and the internal payable in S’s balance
sheet should be treated as equity from P.
Failure to correctly handle the intercompany receivables and payables
can generate seriously misleading results. In the example, if the intercompany accounts had been treated as working capital instead of equity, the
subsidiary’s invested capital would have been understated by about 30 percent, leading to an overstatement of ROIC by roughly the same amount.

Financial Subsidiaries
Some firms have financial subsidiaries that provide financing for customers
(for example, General Motors Acceptance Corporation [GMAC]) or operate
independent financial businesses (GE Capital). Balance sheets of financial
businesses are structured differently from those of industrial or service
businesses. The assets tend to be financial rather than physical (largely re-

CREATING BUSINESS UNIT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

551

Exhibit 19.2 Intercompany Receivables and Payables
$
Parent
Company P
100
20
150
25
295

Subsidiary S
30
–
50
–
80

Accounts payable (external)
Accounts payable (intercompany)
Debt
Equity
Total liabilities and equity

80
–
100
115
295

15
20
20
25
80

(25)
(45)

95
–
120
115
330

Invested capital
Accounts receivable (external)
Accounts payable (external)
Working capital
Other assets
Invested capital

100
(80)
20
150
170

30
(15)
15
50
65

–
–
–
–
–

130
(95)
35
200
235

Debt
Equity
Equity equivalent—intercompany payable to P
Accounts receivable (intercompany)
Equity investment in S
Invested capital

100
115
–
(20)
(25)
170

20
25
20
–
–
65

–
(25)
(20)
20
25
–

120
115
–
–
–
235

Balance sheet
Accounts receivable (external)
Accounts receivable (intercompany)
Other assets
Equity investment in S
Total assets

Eliminations
–
(20)
–
(25)
(45)

(20)

Consolidated
130
–
200
–
330

ceivables or loans) and are usually highly leveraged. As we detail in Chapter 25, financial businesses should be valued using cash flow to equity discounted at the cost of equity. Most companies with significant financial
subsidiaries provide a separate balance sheet and income statement for
those subsidiaries, which can be used to analyze and value the financial
subsidiaries separately.
When valuing financial subsidiaries, be careful not to double count the
debt of the financial subsidiary in the overall valuation of the company.
The equity value of a financial subsidiary is already net of the subsidiary’s
debt, so when you subtract debt from enterprise value to arrive at the
consolidated company’s value, subtract only the debt associated with
nonfinancial operations. To keep things clean, we usually rework the consolidated company’s income statements and balance sheets to treat the financial subsidiary as a nonconsolidated subsidiary. The resulting financial
statements contain a single line in the balance sheet representing the net
equity of the subsidiary and a single line in the income statement representing the subsidiary’s net income.

552

VALUING MULTIBUSINESS COMPANIES

Valuation with Public Data
If you are valuing a multibusiness company from the outside in, you will
not have complete financial statements by business unit. Exhibit 19.3 shows
the disclosure typical of U.S. listed companies (IFRS disclosures are similar). Under U.S. GAAP, companies disclose revenues, operating profit (or
something similar, such as EBITA), total assets, depreciation, and capital
expenditures. You need to convert these items to NOPLAT and invested
capital, as shown in Exhibit 19.4.
For the remainder of this chapter we will illustrate the concepts discussed using Personal Products Inc. (PP Inc.), a fictional company with
three consumer businesses. PP Inc. has a branded soup unit, a personal care
unit, and a food service business. The soup unit produces 40 percent of the
company’s revenues and more than half the company’s profit. It is a shrinking business with intense competition from other soup brands as well as
private labels. The personal care division also delivers about 40 percent of
the revenues but only a third of the profit. This division’s portfolio includes
strong but mature brands, with growth equal to GDP growth. The food service business, with a little over 20 percent of the revenues and the remaining profit, has higher growth prospects than the other units, but it operates
in an industry that is intensely competitive and fragmented.

NOPLAT To estimate NOPLAT, start with reported EBITA by business
unit. Next, allocate income taxes, the pension adjustment, and the operating lease adjustment to each of the business units (for more information on
these adjustments, see Chapter 7). To allocate the consolidated-company
lease adjustment (if any), estimate the assets leased by each business unit

Exhibit 19.3 Personal Products, Inc.: Business Unit Information Presented
in the Annual Report
$ million

External revenues
Internal revenues
Total revenues
Operating costs
EBITA

Soup
2,400
400
2,800
(2,184)
616

Depreciation
17
(included in operating costs, above)
Capital expenditures
84
Assets

1,200

Personal
care
2,200

Food
service
1,200

2,200
(1,826)
374

1,200
(1,056)
144

(400)
(400)
400
–

–
(70)
(70)

Consolidated
5,800
–
5,800
(4,736)
1,064

22

12

–

8

59

77

38

1,100

540

Eliminations

Corporate
–

199
150

2,990

CREATING BUSINESS UNIT FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

553

Exhibit 19.4 Personal Products, Inc.: Estimating Business Unit NOPLAT,
Invested Capital, and ROIC
$ million
Income statement
Revenues
Operating costs

Soup
2,800
(2,184)

Personal
care
2,200
(1,826)

Food
service
1,200
(1,056)

Eliminations
(400)
400

Corporate
–
(70)

EBITA
Operating taxes

616
(240)

374
(146)

144
(56)

–
–

(70)
27

NOPLAT

376

228

88

–

(43)

Reconciliation to net income
Net income
Interest expense (after tax)
Interest income (after tax)
NOPLAT

564
86
(1)
649

Economic balance sheet and invested capital
Total assets
1,200
1,100
Goodwill
(150)
(100)
Accounts payable
Wages payable
Other current
liabilities
Invested capital
(excluding goodwill)
Debt
Equity
Goodwill
Invested capital
(excluding goodwill)
ROIC (percent)
(excluding goodwill)

Consolidated Comments
5,800 From10-K
(4,736) Plug to
match EBITA
1,064 From10-K
(415) Use rate
for whole firm
649

540
–

–
–

150
–

(157)
(62)
(41)

(143)
(57)
(38)

(78)
(31)
(21)

–
–
–

–
–
–

790

762

410

–

150

2,990 Given in 10-K
(250) From 10-K
or recent deals
(378) Allocate by revenue
(150) Allocate by revenue
(100) Allocate by revenue
2,112

2,000
362
(250)
2,112
48

30

21

31

NOPLAT/
invested capital

(often, you must assume leased assets are in the same proportion as purchased assets), and then allocate the consolidated-company lease adjustment by this fraction. We typically allocate the pension adjustment to each
business unit by the number of employees. Finally, use the effective overall
corporate tax rate for all business units unless you have information to estimate each unit’s tax rate. After estimating NOPLAT, reconcile the sum of
all business unit NOPLATs to consolidated net income to ensure that all adjustments have been properly made.

Invested capital To estimate invested capital, start with total assets by
business unit, and subtract estimates for nonoperating assets and noninterest-bearing operating liabilities. Nonoperating assets include excess

554

VALUING MULTIBUSINESS COMPANIES

cash, investments in nonconsolidated subsidiaries, pension assets, and deferred tax assets. To measure invested capital excluding goodwill, subtract
allocated goodwill by business unit. Frequently, these nonoperating assets
are held at the corporate level, not in the business units, so no adjustment is
needed. If nonoperating assets are included in the assets of the business
units, you may need to do some investigative work to identify them by business unit.
Non-interest-bearing operating liabilities include accounts payable,
taxes payable, and accrued expenses. They can be allocated to the business
units by either revenue or total assets. Once you have estimated invested
capital for the business units and corporate center, reconcile these estimates with the total invested capital derived from the consolidated statements, as shown in Exhibit 19.4. The sum of the invested capital for the
business units and corporate center should equal the invested capital calculated from the consolidated financial statements.

ESTIMATE COST OF CAPITAL BY BUSINESS UNIT
Each business unit should be valued at its own cost of capital, because the
systematic risk ( beta) of operating cash flows and their ability to support
debt (that is, the implied capital structure) will differ by business unit. To
determine a business unit’s cost of capital, we need the unit’s target capital
structure, its cost of equity (as determined by its beta), and its cost of borrowing (for details on estimating the weighted average cost of capital, see
Chapter 10).

Target Capital Structure for Each Business Unit
First, estimate each business unit’s target capital structure. We recommend
using the median capital structure of publicly traded peers, especially if
most peers have similar capital structures. Next, using the debt levels based
on industry medians, aggregate the business unit debt to see how the total
compares with the company’s total target debt level (not necessarily its current level). If the sum of business unit debt differs from the consolidated
company’s target debt, we typically record the difference as a corporate
item, valuing its tax shield separately (or tax cost when the company is more
conservatively financed). We do this to minimize differences between the
cost of capital and the valuation of the business units relative to their peers.
If the business unit has no comparable peers or if the capital structures
of peers are widely different, allocate the consolidated debt across the
business units so that each business unit has the same interest coverage
ratio (EBITA/interest expense). As we demonstrated in Chapter 17, inter-

ESTIMATE COST OF CAPITAL BY BUSINESS UNIT

555

est coverage is the single best predictor of credit rating and financial risk.
Assigning comparable coverage ratios across business units ensures that
they each have roughly the same financial risk and contribution to the
company’s overall credit risk.
In some cases, one or more business units may have tangible assets that
are highly leverageable (for example, real estate, hotels, and airplanes).
When this occurs, use tangible assets to apportion debt to these units.
The allocation of debt among business units for legal or internal corporate purposes is generally irrelevant to the economic analysis of the business units. The legal or internal debt is generally driven by tax purposes or
is an accident of history (cash-consuming units have lots of debt). These allocations are rarely economically meaningful and should be ignored.

The Cost of Capital by Business Unit
Next, determine the levered beta and cost of equity for each business unit.
To determine a business unit’s beta, first estimate an unlevered sector median beta (as detailed in Chapter 10). Relever the beta using the same business unit capital structure derived previously. For corporate-center
cash flows, use a weighted average of the business unit costs of capital. Exhibit 19.5 summarizes the estimation of cost of capital for PP Inc. While
the unlevered betas for PP’s business units are in a narrow range (0.7 to
0.9), larger differences in capital structures lead to weighted average costs
of capital that range from 8.6 percent for the soup unit to 9.5 percent for
the food service unit.

Exhibit 19.5 Personal Products, Inc.: Estimating Business Unit Cost
of Capital
Soup
Estimated unlevered beta
0.7
Target debt to capital (percent) 25.0
Levered beta
0.9
Cost of debt (percent)
6.0
Cost of equity (percent)
9.3
WACC (percent)
7.9

Risk free rate
Inflation
Market risk premium

5.0%
2.8%
4.8%

Personal
care
0.8
20.0
1.0
6.0
9.8
8.6

Food
service
0.9
15.0
1.1
6.0
10.3
9.3

Corporate
0.8
20.0
1.0
6.0
9.8
8.6

Comments
Median of peers
Median of peers
At target capital structure

556

VALUING MULTIBUSINESS COMPANIES

When you value a company by summing the business unit values, there
is no need to estimate a corporate-wide cost of capital or to reconcile the
business unit betas with the corporate beta. The individual business unit
betas are more relevant than the corporate beta, which is subject to significant estimation error, especially when the company is widely diversified.

SUM THE PARTS AND INTERPRET RESULTS
The final step in estimating the company’s value is to perform a discounted
cash flow valuation of each business unit and sum the business unit values.
Discount the forecasted free cash flow for each business unit, including an
estimate of its continuing value as outlined in Chapter 11.
Value the corporate center cash flows separately as well. We typically
project corporate costs to grow at the same rate as the overall company revenues. To determine continuing value, do not use the key value driver formula, as NOPLAT is negative (the corporate cost center has only costs), and
ROIC is meaningless. Instead, use a cash flow perpetuity formula. Start
with the negative after-tax free cash flow in the first year of the continuingvalue period, and assume that it grows in perpetuity at the same growth
rate as the overall company.
Add the value of nonoperating assets to the sum of the business unit operating DCF values less the value of the corporate center to figure total enterprise value. From this number, subtract debt and other nonequity claims
to obtain the value of equity (see Chapter 11 for more details).
Applying this procedure to the PP Inc. example, Exhibit 19.6 shows the
estimated DCF value of each business unit of PP Inc. The equity value derived from the sum-of-parts DCF value is reasonably close to the observed
equity value. The resulting enterprise-value-to-forward-EBITA multiples,
also shown in the exhibit, reflect the different growth and ROIC characteristics of the units. Soup is growing at 1 percent (shrinking in inflation-adjusted terms) but has the highest ROIC. In spite of the high ROIC, it has the
lowest enterprise-value-to-EBITA multiple. Food Service is growing the
fastest but has the lowest ROIC. Interestingly, Personal Care has lower
growth than Food Service but a higher ROIC. The effect of the higher ROIC
overcomes the effect of the lower growth, so its resulting multiple is higher
than that for Food Service. As this simple analysis confirms, both ROIC
and growth are critical inputs to valuation. Superior growth alone cannot
ensure high value unless accompanied by high returns on investment.
Business unit valuation analysis also sets the stage for a comprehensive
discussion of management priorities for operational improvement. Returning to the example in Exhibit 19.6, a dollar of revenue growth in the soup
unit will add the most value on a relative basis, as it has the highest ROIC
(assuming the ROIC on new projects equal its historical ROIC). The incre-

SUM THE PARTS AND INTERPRET RESULTS

557

Exhibit 19.6 Summing Business Unit Values
Assumptions
Growth (2005 and after, percent)
Operating margins (2005 and after, percent)
ROIC (2005 and after, percent)
Invested capital to revenue ratio (percent)

Soup
1
22
48
28

Personal
care
3
17
30
35

Food
service
4
12
21
34

Enterprise value and multiples
Estimated DCF enterprise value ($ million)
Estimated forward EBITA ($ million)
Enterprise value to EBITA multiple

5,327
622
8.6

3,684
385
9.6

1,351
150
9.0

Consolidated equity value
($ million)
Soup
Personal care
Food service
Corporate costs
Operating enterprise value
Nonoperating assets
Debt and other liabilities
Estimated equity value

5,327
3,684
1,351
(873)
9,490
–
(2,000)
7,490

Observed equity value

6,900

Corporate
3

(873)

mental value from margin improvement or increased capital efficiency in
the Food Service unit will have a bigger effect on value than in the other
two units.
The valuation of multibusiness-unit firms often leads to interesting insights. In the case of one consumer packaged-goods firm, for example, the
core consumer products business represented three-fourths of the revenues
and capital invested, with a secondary business representing the remainder. However, the profit margins and return on capital in the secondary
business were nearly twice the values for the core business. Consequently,
the value creation in the secondary business (total value less capital invested) was similar to that of the core business. A pure top-down view of
the firm would not have highlighted this disparity in value creation. The
findings had important implications for the relative value of growth and
margin improvement in the two businesses and for where management
should focus its attention.
Business unit analysis can thus provide striking insights into where
value is being created or destroyed within the firm. It offers a road map for
reorganizing the portfolio of businesses to create shareholder value.

558

VALUING MULTIBUSINESS COMPANIES

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Identify the differences between an internal estimate of company
value and an external estimate of corporate value. Does access to
managerial accounting data necessarily lead to better corporate
value estimates than relying on publicly available information?
2. Outline a process to identify the target capital structure of a business
unit within a multibusiness company.
3. When estimating enterprise value, the firm’s cost of capital is a critical driver of value. Explain how both financial and operating risks
impact both the company’s capital structure and a business unit’s
target capital structure. What influence do operating and financial
synergies have on the component cost estimates of these capital
structures?
4. What is meant by the term conglomerate discount? If the capital markets are efficient, should a conglomerate discount exist? Assuming
that the capital markets are efficient, provide an alternative explanation for the existence of a conglomerate discount.
5. Chapter 19 suggests that business unit valuation might provide managerial benefits, such as a better prioritization both of a manager’s
time and efforts and of corporate resource allocation. Discuss how
business unit valuation might lead to better alignment of corporate
priorities with value creation.
6. Identify how intercompany receivables and payables affect the estimation of company value. What steps could a manager take to minimize the impact of intercompany receivables and payables on both
business unit value and on corporate value?
7. How should an analyst account for intracompany sales? What impact
does intracompany sales have on the valuation of a company?

20
Valuing Flexibility
In valuing companies with the standard DCF approach outlined in Part
Two, we did not consider the value of managerial flexibility. Managers
react to changes in the economic environment by adjusting their plans and
strategies. For example, if a company develops a new product, it may invest
to expand this business line. Then, if prices of critical inputs rise, it may
scale back production or even terminate the effort. This flexibility represents a certain value, but a single projection or even multiple scenarios for
cash flows cannot calculate what that value is.
Corporate-wide valuation models rarely include flexibility. To accurately analyze and model flexibility, you must be able to describe specific
decisions managers could take in response to future events, including the
cash flow implications of those decisions. Flexibility mostly occurs at the
individual business or project level, and concerns decisions related to production, capacity investments, marketing, research and development, and
so on. In valuing an entire company, flexibility is relevant only in special
cases, such as in the case of companies with a single product, companies in
a commodity-based industry, or companies in (or near) distress. For example, to value Internet or biotech companies with a handful of promising
new products in development, you could project sales, profit, and investments for the company as a whole that are conditional on the success of
product development.1 Another example is a company that has built its
strategy around buying up smaller players and integrating them into a
bigger entity, capturing synergies along the way. The first acquisitions
may not create value in their own right, but may open opportunities for
value creation through further acquisitions.

1

See, for example, E. S. Schwartz and M. Moon, “Rational Pricing of Internet Companies,” Financial Analysts Journal, 56(3) (2000): 62–75; and D. Kellog and J. Charnes, “Real-Options Valuation for a Biotechnology Company,” Financial Analysts Journal, 56(3) (2000): 76 –84.

559

560

VALUING FLEXIBILITY

Flexibility is typically more relevant in the valuation of individual businesses and projects because it can be more clearly identified, analyzed, and
valued in a bottom-up approach. In this chapter, we concentrate on how to
value flexibility within the context of project valuation.
When making an investment, companies often have significant flexibility. If an investment project goes poorly, the company may scale it back or
abandon it. If it is highly successful, the company may expand or extend
it. Furthermore, a company may defer the investment until it resolves uncertainty through market testing. It is important to recognize that flexibility can take many different forms, each of which can represent substantial value.
To capture that value, let us explore two contingent valuation approaches: real-option valuation (ROV), based on formal option-pricing
models, and decision tree analysis (DTA). Although they differ on some
technical points, both boil down to forecasting, implicitly or explicitly, the
future free cash flows contingent on the future states of the world and
management decisions, and then discounting these to today’s value.
You should learn both the ROV and the DTA approaches, because each
has advantages in certain applications. The application of ROV approaches
has improved greatly over the past two decades.2 Real-option valuation is
theoretically superior to DTA, and its key concepts (notably, the modeling
of managerial flexibility in terms of options) are highly relevant to financial decision making. But ROV is not a cure-all. By definition, it cannot replace traditional discounted cash flow because valuing an option using
ROV still requires knowing the value of the underlying assets. Unless the
asset has an observable market price, you will have to estimate that value
using traditional DCF. Because commodity prices are observable, the ROV
approach is especially well suited to decisions in commodity-based businesses, such as investments in oil and gas fields, refining facilities, chemical plants, and power generators.
Valuing flexibility does not always require sophisticated, formal optionpricing models. The DTA approach is an effective alternative for valuing
flexibility related to technological risk instead of commodity risk. Furthermore, if you have no reliable estimates on the value and variance of the cash
flows underlying the investment decision, there is little justification for
using sophisticated ROV approaches. In addition, the DTA approach is more
transparent than ROV, which most managers cannot easily decipher.
This chapter is limited to the basic concepts of valuing managerial flexibility and real options. We focus on the following topics:
2

See, for example, E. S. Schwartz and L. Trigeorgis, eds., Real Options and Investment under Uncertainty: Classical Readings and Recent Contributions (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001);
T. Copeland and V. Antikarov, Real Options: A Practitioner’s Guide (New York: Texere, 2003); or
L. Trigeorgis, Real Options: Managerial Flexibility and Strategy in Resource Allocation (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1996).

UNCERTAINTY, FLEXIBILITY, AND VALUE

561

• The fundamental concepts behind uncertainty, flexibility, and value:
When and why does flexibility have value?
• Classifying flexibility in terms of real options to defer investments, make follow-on investments, and expand, change, or abandon production.
• Comparing DTA and ROV approaches to valuing flexibility and identifying when each approach is most appropriate.
• A four-step approach to analyzing and valuing real options, illustrated with numerical examples using ROV and DTA.

UNCERTAINTY, FLEXIBILITY, AND VALUE
To appreciate the value of flexibility and its key value drivers, consider a
simple example:3 Suppose you are deciding whether to invest $6,000 one
year from now to produce and distribute a new pharmaceutical drug already under development. In the upcoming final development stage, the
product will undergo clinical tests on patients for one year. The trials will
have either of two possible outcomes. If the drug proves to be highly effective, it will generate an annual net cash inflow of $500 into perpetuity. If it
is only somewhat effective, however, the annual net cash inflow will be only
$100 into perpetuity. These outcomes are equally probable.
Based on this information, the expected future net cash flow is $300, the
probability-weighted average of the risky outcomes ($500 and $100). We assume that success in developing the new product and the value of the new
product are unrelated to what happens in the overall economy, so this risk
is fully diversifiable by the company’s investors. Therefore, the cost of capital for this product equals the risk-free rate, say, 5 percent (remember, only
nondiversifiable risk requires a premium). Assuming that the company will
realize its first year’s product sales immediately upon completing the trials
and at the end of each year thereafter, the net present value (NPV) of the investment is estimated as follows:
NPV =

− 6, 000 ∞ 300
+∑
t = 286
1.05
t =1 (1.05 )

To apply the NPV approach, we discount the incremental expected project cash flows at the WACC. Any prior development expenses are irrelevant
because they are sunk costs. Alternatively, if the project is cancelled, the
NPV equals $0. Therefore, management should approve the incremental investment of $6,000.
3

The example is inspired by A. Dixit and R. Pindyck, Investment under Uncertainty (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994), 26.

562

VALUING FLEXIBILITY

In this example of the NPV decision rule, undertaking development creates value. But there are more alternatives than deciding today whether to
invest. Using an approach similar to the scenario approach described in
Chapter 11, we can rewrite the previous NPV calculation in terms of the
probability-weighted values of the drug, discounted to today:
 −6, 000 ∞ 500 
 −6, 000 ∞ 100 
NPV = 0.5 × 
+∑
+∑
t  + 0.5 × 
t 
t =1 (1.05 ) 
t =1 (1.05 ) 
 1.05
 1.05


= 0.5 ( 4, 286 ) + 0.5 ( −3,714) = 286

Here, the NPV is the weighted average of two distinct results: a positive NPV
of $4,286 following a favorable trial outcome and a negative NPV of −$3,714 for
an unfavorable outcome. If the decision to invest can be deferred until trial results are known, the project becomes much more attractive. Specifically, if the
drug proves to be less effective, the project can be halted, avoiding the negative NPV. You need invest only if the drug is highly effective, and the annual
cash flow of $500 more than compensates for the incremental investment.
This flexibility is essentially an option to defer the investment decision.
To value the option, we can use a contingent NPV approach, working from
right to left in the payoff tree shown in Exhibit 20.1:
 −6, 000 ∞ 500 

 −6, 000 ∞ 100 

NPV = 0.5 × Max 
+∑
,
0
+
0
.
5
×
Max
+∑


t
t  , 0
t =1 (1.05) 
t=1 (1.05) 
 1.05

 1.05

= 0.5 ( 4, 286 ) + 0.5 (0) = 2,143

The contingent NPV of $2,143 is considerably higher than the $286 NPV of
committing today. Therefore, the best alternative is to defer a decision until

Exhibit 20.1 Value of Flexibility to Defer Investment
$
t=0
p=
Contingent NPV

Note: t = time, in years
p = probability

t=1
PV (Cash flows)
Investment
PV (Net cash flows)

10,500
(6,000)
4,500

PV (Cash flows)
Investment
PV (Net cash flows)

2,100
(6,000)
–

2,143
1–p=

Risk-free rate = 5%

Successful product
50%

50%
Unsuccessful product

UNCERTAINTY, FLEXIBILITY, AND VALUE

563

the trial outcomes are known. The value of the option to defer investment is
the difference between the value of the project with flexibility and its value
without flexibility: $2,143 −$286 = $1,857.
Based on this example, we can summarize the distinction between the
standard and contingent NPV. The standard NPV is the maximum, decided
today, of the expected discounted cash flows or zero:
 Expected ( Cash Flows ) 
Standard NPV = Max 
, 0
t= 0
Cost of Capital



The contingent NPV is the expected value of the maximums, decided when
information arrives, of the discounted cash flows in each future state or zero:

 Cash Flows Contingent on Information

Contingent NPV = Expected  Max 
, 0 
Cost
of
Capital


t= 0


These two NPV approaches use information quite differently. Standard
NPV forces a decision based on today’s expectation of future information,
whereas contingent NPV permits the flexibility of making decisions after
the information arrives. Unlike standard NPV, it captures the value of flexibility. A project’s contingent NPV will always be greater than or equal to its
standard NPV.
The value of flexibility is related to the degree of uncertainty and the
room for managerial reaction (see Exhibit 20.2 on p. 564). It is greatest when
uncertainty is high and managers can react to new information. In contrast,
if there is little uncertainty, managers are unlikely to receive new information that would alter future decisions, so flexibility has little value. In addition, if managers cannot act on new information that becomes available, the
value of flexibility also is low.
Even if flexibility has value, it may not affect an investment decision. An
investment project with a high NPV will be undertaken regardless of new
information. The largest impact on decision making occurs when the standard NPV is close to zero, that is, when the decision whether to undertake
the project is a close call. Sometimes senior management intuitively overrules standard NPV results and accepts an investment project for “strategic
reasons.” In these cases, contingent valuation fits better with strategic intuition than with the rigid assumptions of standard NPV approaches.

Drivers of Flexibility
To identify and value flexibility, you must understand what drives its value.
Consider what happens if the range of possible annual cash flow outcomes

564

VALUING FLEXIBILITY

Exhibit 20.2 When Is Flexibility Valuable?
Likelihood of receiving new information
Uncertainty

Moderate
flexibility
value

High
flexibility
value

Low
flexibility
value

Moderate
flexibility
value

Ability to respond

High

High

Low

Room for managerial flexibility

Low

(originally $500 versus $100 per year) increases to $600 versus $0. Since expected cash flows and cost of capital remain unchanged, the standard NPV
is the same ($286).4 However, the contingent NPV increases from its prior
level of $2,143 to:


 −6, 000 ∞ 600 
 −6, 000 ∞
0 
+
×
+∑
NPV = 0.5 × Max 
+∑
,
0
0
.
5
Max


t
t  , 0
t =1 (1.05 ) 
t =1 (1.05 ) 


 1.05
 1.05
= 0.5 ( 6, 286 ) + 0.5 ( 0 ) = 3, 143

The contingent NPV of $3,143 is almost 50 percent greater at this higher
level of uncertainty. Why? The investment is made only if the drug is highly
effective (that is, under a favorable trial outcome), so only the cash flows
from the favorable outcome affect the contingent valuation. Since the cash
flow projections contingent on the favorable outcome have increased by 20
percent, and the required investment has not changed, the contingent NPV
increases very strongly. The value of the deferral option rises from $1,857 to
$2,857 (computed as $3,143 − $286).
We can formally derive the key value drivers of real options by making
an analogy to financial options and option-pricing theory. In our original
example, the deferral option is identical to a call option with an exercise
4

We assumed that the trial outcome risk is uncorrelated with the overall economy.

UNCERTAINTY, FLEXIBILITY, AND VALUE

565

Exhibit 20.3 Drivers of Flexibility Value

Investment costs
Higher required investment
reduces flexibility value

Time to expire
More time before decision
is required increases
flexibility value

Cash flows lost to competition
Losing more cash flows to
competitors when deferring
investment reduces flexibility value

Flexibility
value

Risk-free interest rate
Higher interest rate increases time
value of deferral of investment—
but may reduce present value of
underlying cash flows

Present value of cash flows
Higher value of underlying
project cash flows increases
flexibility value

Uncertainty (volatility) about
present value
More uncertainty increases option
value—but may reduce present
value of underlying cash flows

price of $6,000 and a one-year life on an underlying risky asset that has a
current value of $6,000 and a variance determined by the cash flow spread
of $400 across outcomes. As with financial options, the value of a real option depends on six parameters, summarized in Exhibit 20.3.
These drivers show when flexibility most affects the valuation of
a particular investment project. Holding other drivers constant, option
value decreases with higher investment costs and more cash flows lost
while holding the option. Option value increases with higher value of
the underlying asset’s cash flows, greater uncertainty, higher interest
rates, and a longer lifetime of the option. With higher option values, a
standard NPV calculation that ignores flexibility will more seriously underestimate the true NPV.
Be careful how you interpret the impact of value drivers when designing
investment strategies to exploit flexibility. The impact described in Exhibit
20.3 holds only when all other value drivers remain constant. In practice,
changes in uncertainty and interest rates not only affect the value of the option but will usually change the value of the underlying asset as well. When
you assess the impact of these drivers, you need to assess both direct and
possible indirect effects. Take the case of higher uncertainty. In our example,
we increased the uncertainty of future cash flow without changing its expectation or present value. But, if greater uncertainty lowers the expected level
of cash flows or raises the cost of capital, the impact on the value of the option
could be negative. The same holds for the impact of an interest rate increase.

566

VALUING FLEXIBILITY

Holding the present value of cash inflows constant, higher interest rates
only reduce the present value of required investment, thereby increasing the
option value. In reality, higher interest rates would also reduce the present
value of the underlying asset, which lowers the option’s value.

CLASSIFYING FLEXIBILITY IN TERMS OF REAL OPTIONS
To help identify and analyze a company’s operating and strategic flexibility, we segment options into four mutually exclusive ( but not exhaustive)
categories.

Option to Defer Investment
The option to defer an investment is equivalent to a call option on stock. For
example, assume a leaseholder of an undeveloped oil reserve has the right
to develop the reserve by paying a lease-on-development cost. The leaseholder can defer development until oil prices rise. The expected development cost is equivalent to the exercise price.
Deferring investment is not without cost. The opportunity cost of deferring investment equals the difference between the current net proceeds per
barrel of oil produced and the present value per barrel of developed oil reserves. If this opportunity cost is too high, the decision maker may want to
exercise the option (e.g., develop the reserve) before its relinquishment date.

Abandonment Option
The option to abandon (or sell) a project, such as the right to abandon a coal
mine, is equivalent to a put option on a stock. If a project proceeds poorly,
the decision maker may abandon the project and collect the liquidation
value. The expected liquidation (or resale) value of the project is equivalent
to the exercise price. When the present value of the asset falls below the liquidation value, the act of abandoning (or selling) the project is equivalent to
exercising a put. Because the liquidation value of the project sets a lower
bound on the project’s value, the option to liquidate is valuable. A project
that can be liquidated is worth more than a similar project without the possibility of abandonment.

Follow-On (Compound) Options
Technically speaking, follow-on options are options on options (so-called
compound options). An example would be phased investments, such as a
factory that can be built in stages, each stage contingent on those that pre-

CLASSIFYING FLEXIBILITY IN TERMS OF REAL OPTIONS

567

cede it. At each decision point, management can continue the project by investing additional funds (an exercise price) or abandon it for whatever it
can fetch. Other examples are research and development programs, newproduct launches, exploration and development of oil and gas fields, movie
sequels, and an acquisition program where the first purchase is thought of
as a platform for later acquisitions.

Option to Adjust Production
With an option to adjust production, a company has flexibility in choosing
the scale, scope, lifetime, or raw materials for its production processes.
Companies can do this in several ways, including the following:
• Option to expand or contract. The option to expand the scale of a project
is equivalent to a call option on stock. For example, management may
choose to build production facilities in such a way that they can be
easily expanded if a product is more successful than was anticipated.
An option to expand gives management the ability, but not the obligation, to make additional follow-on investments (e.g., to increase the
production rate) if the project proceeds well. The option to contract
the scale of a project’s operation is conceptually equivalent to a put
option. Projects should be engineered so that output can be contracted if necessary. The ability to forgo future spending on the project is equivalent to the exercise price of the put.
• Option to extend or shorten. Companies that can extend the life of an
asset or contract by paying a fixed amount of money (the exercise
price) own a valuable option. This is also true if it is possible to
shorten the life of an asset or a contract. The option to extend is a call
option, and the option to shorten is a put option. Real estate leases
often have clauses with an option to extend or shorten the lease.
• Option to increase or decrease scope. Scope is the number of activities
covered in a project. An option related to scope is the ability to
switch among alternative courses of action at a future decision point.
Scope is like diversification—it is sometimes preferable to be able, at
some exercise cost, to choose among a wide range of alternatives. An
option to increase scope is similar to a call.
• Switching options. A project whose operation can be switched on and
off (or switched between two distinct locations, and so on) is worth
more than a similar project without this flexibility. Examples include
a flexible manufacturing system that can produce two or more different products, peak-load power generation, and the ability to exit and
reenter an industry. The option to switch project locations or choose
among raw materials is a portfolio of call and put options. Restarting

568

VALUING FLEXIBILITY

operations when a project is shut down is equivalent to a call option.
Shutting down operations when unfavorable conditions arise is
equivalent to a put option. The cost of restarting (or shutting down)
operations may be thought of as the exercise price.

METHODS FOR VALUATION OF FLEXIBILITY
There are two methods for contingent valuation: decision tree analysis
(DTA) and real option valuation (ROV) using formal option-pricing models.
Each method is illustrated with a simple example: the opportunity to invest
$105 at the end of one year in a project that has an equal chance of returning
either $150 or $50 in cash flow. The risk-free rate, rf , is 5 percent, and the
cost of capital for the project is 10 percent. The present value (PV) of the
cash flows as of today is:
PV =

0.5 (150) + 0.5 ( 50 )
1.10

= 90.9

If an investment decision was required immediately, the project would
be declined. The standard NPV of the project equals the discounted expected cash flow of $90.9 minus the present value of the investment outlay
of $105 next year. Since the level of investment is certain, it should be discounted at the risk-free rate of 5 percent:
Standard NPV = 90.9 −

105
= 90.9 − 100 = −9.1
1.05

The answer changes if management has flexibility to defer the investment
decision for one year, allowing it to make the decision after observing next
year’s cash flow outcome (see Exhibit 20.4). The net cash flows in the favorable state are $150 − $105 = $45. In the unfavorable state, management
would decline to invest, accepting net cash flows of $0. We first value this
flexibility using an ROV approach.

Real-Option Valuation (ROV)
Option-pricing models use a replicating portfolio to value the project. The
basic idea of a replicating portfolio is straightforward: If you can construct a
portfolio of priced securities that has the same payouts as an option, the
portfolio and option should have the same price. If the securities and the option are traded in an open market, this identity is required; otherwise

METHODS FOR VALUATION OF FLEXIBILITY

569

Exhibit 20.4 Contingent Payoffs for Investment Project, Twin Security,
and Risk-Free Bond
$
t=0

t=1

p=

Successful project
50%

NPV?
50%
1–p=
Unsuccessful project
Risk-free rate = 5%
WACC = 10%

Project
cash flows
without
flexibility
Cash flow
150
Investment
(105)
Net cash flow
45
Cash flow
Investment
Net cash flow

50
(105)
(55)

Project
cash flows
with
flexibility
150
(105)
45
50
(105)
–

Replicating
security

Riskfree
bond

50.0

1.05

16.7

1.05

Note: t = time, in years
p = probability

arbitrage profits are possible. The interesting implication is that the ROV approach lets you correctly value complex, contingent cash flow patterns without having to determine the option’s expected cash flow and cost of capital.
Returning to our $105 investment project, assume there exists a perfectly correlated security (or commodity) that trades in the market for $30.3
per share.5 Its payouts ($50.0 and $16.7) equal one-third of the payouts of
our project, and its expected return equals the underlying project’s cost of
capital. This twin security can be used to value the project including an option to defer.6
To create a replicating portfolio, form a portfolio consisting of N shares of
the twin security and B risk-free bonds with a face value of $1. In the favorable state, the twin security pays $50 for each of the N shares, and each
bond pays its face value plus interest, or (1 + rf). Together, these payouts
must equal $45. Applying a similar construction to the unfavorable state, we
can write two equations with two unknowns:
50.0N + 1.05B = 45
16.7N + 1.05B = 0
5

You could also use the twin security to value the invest ment project without f lexibility by
means of a replicating portfolio. Because the twin security’s cash f lows are always exactly onethird of the project cash f lows, the project without f lexibility should be worth three times as
much as the twin security, or 90.9 (= 3 × 30.3). The twin security is a basic concept that is implicitly used in standard DCF as well; you derive the beta of a project by identifying a highly
correlated, traded security and use that security’s beta as input for the cost of capital in the
DCF valuation.
6
If the project itself would be traded, you would not need a twin security but would construct a
replicating portfolio with the traded value of the project itself.

570

VALUING FLEXIBILITY

The solution is N = 1.35 and B = −$21.43. Thus, to build a replicating portfolio, buy 1.35 shares and short 21.43 bonds (shorting a bond is common language for selling a bond, or borrowing money).
This position pays off exactly the same cash flow as the investment project under both states of the world. Therefore, the value of the project including the ability to defer should equal the value of the replicating portfolio:
Contingent NPV = (N × Price of Twin Security) − (B × 1)
= 1.35(30.3) − 21.43(1) = 19.5

The value of the deferral option is the difference between the total contingent NPV of the project and its standard NPV without flexibility: $19.5 −
(−$9.1) = $28.6 (remember, the standard NPV was negative).
Contingent NPV can also be determined with an alternative ROV approach, so-called risk-neutral valuation. The name is somewhat misleading
because a risk-neutral valuation does adjust for risk, but as part of the scenario probabilities rather than the discount rate. To value an option, we
weight the future cash flows by risk-adjusted (or so-called risk-neutral)
probabilities instead of the actual scenario probabilities. The probabilityweighted average cash flow is then discounted by the risk-free rate to determine current value. The risk-neutral probability of the favorable state, p*, is
defined as:
p* =

1 + rf − d
u−d

= 0.45

where
u=
d=

FV(Favorable State) 50.0
=
= 1.65
30.3
PV
FV(Unfavorable State)
PV

=

16.7
= 0.55
30.3

These probabilities implicitly capture the risk premium for investments
perfectly correlated with the twin security. We discount the future cash
flows weighted by these risk-adjusted probabilities at the risk-free rate of 5
percent, arriving at exactly the same value determined using the replicating portfolio:

Contingent NPV =

0.45 ( 45 ) + 0.55 ( 0 )
1.05

= 19.5

VALUATION BASED ON DECISION TREE ANALYSIS

571

It is no coincidence that the replicating portfolio and risk-neutral valuation lead to the same result. They are mathematically equivalent, and both
rely on the price of the twin security to derive the value of an investment
project with an option to defer.

VALUATION BASED ON DECISION TREE ANALYSIS
A second method for valuing a project with flexibility is to use decision
tree analysis (DTA). This involves discounting the contingent future cash
flows at the project’s cost of capital. This leads to the right answer in principle, but only if we can determine the correct cost of capital for a project
with contingent cash flows. We cannot simply use the cost of capital from
the stand-alone project without flexibility, because the contingent cash
flows have a very different risk profile. For example, if we value the project
including flexibility using a cost of capital of 10 percent, the DTA results
would be too high:
Contingent NPV =

0.5 ( 45 ) + 0.5 ( 0 )
1.10

= 20.5

If we discount the cash flows at the 10 percent cost of capital but the investment at the risk-free rate of 5 percent, the DTA valuation would be too low:7
 150 105 
Contingent NPV = 0.5 
−
+ 0.5 ( 0 ) = 18.2
 1.10 1.05 

(20.1)

We can correctly estimate the appropriate cost of capital for the contingent cash flows using the preceding ROV results. Based on the ROV results,
the project with the option is worth $19.5 and has an equal chance of paying
off $45 or $0. Thus, the implied risk-adjusted discount rate for the project
with the option is 15.5 percent, significantly above the underlying project’s
10 percent cost of capital.8 This occurs because the option is far more risky
than the project itself: It has a present value of $19.5 with equal chances of a
131 percent increase or a 100 percent decrease. Conversely, the underlying

7
This DTA approach leads to the correct value of f lexibility only if the underlying risk is too
small to inf luence the future invest ment decision (i.e., if the project value would exceed the invest ment requirements even in the unfavorable state).
8
In this simplified example, there is one value for the cost of capital. In general, the cost of capital for the contingent cash f lows is not constant. It changes with the risk of the option across
time and states of the world.

572

VALUING FLEXIBILITY

project has a present value of $90.9 and a fifty-fifty chance of rising to $150
(a 65 percent increase) or falling to $50 (a 45 percent decrease).

Comparing ROV and DTA Approaches
As summarized in Exhibit 20.5, the standard NPV approach undervalues
the project. The ROV approach generates a correct value because it captures
the value of flexibility by using a replicating portfolio or risk-neutral valuation. The DTA approach could lead to the same result and is quite close in
this example. Unfortunately, the DTA results could be much further off,
since in most cases there is no way to properly determine the cost of capital
for the contingent cash flows other than using ROV.
This example, however, does not mean that ROV is the single best approach to valuation of managerial flexibility. The stylized example did not
take into account two important aspects of real-life strategic decisions: the
type of underlying risk and the availability of data on the value and variance of the underlying asset. Exhibit 20.6 describes when each method is
most suitable. ROV works best when the future cash flows are closely
linked to traded commodities, securities, or currencies. Not surprisingly,
real-option valuations are most often used for commodity-linked invest-

Exhibit 20.5 Valuation Result: Standard versus Contingent NPV
$
Standard NPV

Contingent NPV
Decision tree analysis

NPV
(9.1)

p=

50%

1–p=

50%

Cash flow
Investment
Net cash flow

150
(105)
45

Cash flow
Investment
Net cash flow

50
(105)
(55)

NPV
18.2

p=

50%

1–p=

50%

Cash flow
Investment
Net cash flow

150
(105)
45

Cash flow
Investment
Net cash flow

50
(105)
–

Cash flow
Investment
Net cash flow

150
(105)
45

Cash flow
Investment
Net cash flow

50
(105)
–

Risk-free rate = 5%
WACC = 10%
Real option valuation1

NPV
19.5

Note: t = time, in years
p = probability
p *= binomial (risk-neutral) probability
1
Using risk-neutral valuation.

p* =

45%

1 – p* =

55%

VALUATION BASED ON DECISION TREE ANALYSIS

573

Exhibit 20.6 Application Opportunities for ROV versus DTA

Diversifiable

Nondiversifiable

Nontraded assets

Decision tree
analysis

Decision tree analysis,
real options valuation

Traded assets

Available data

Underlying risk

Decision tree
analysis

Real options
valuation

ments, such as in the mining and oil industry. In most other cases, we
recommend the more straightforward DTA approach because (most of)
the underlying risk is diversifiable or because only rough estimates
are available for required inputs such as the underlying asset value and
variance.

Underlying risk: Diversifiable versus nondiversifiable In the pharmaceutical drug example at the beginning of the chapter, we did not use an
option-pricing model to value the investment, but instead chose a simple
DTA approach. Did we make a mistake? No, the DTA results were correct
because we used the correct cost of capital. If the risk driving the cash flow
uncertainty is uncorrelated with the market (and thus fully diversifiable),
the cost of capital for the contingent cash flows is the same as for the underlying product. In the example, the underlying risk is purely technologicaldevelopment risk, so we were able to use the cost of capital for the fully
developed drug—in this case, the risk-free rate.
To demonstrate this, we use ROV to value the drug’s deferral option
with a replicating portfolio. Assume a twin security exists whose payoffs
are perfectly correlated with the outcome of the drug trial, generating $52.5
when the outcome is favorable and $10.5 when it is unfavorable. Because its
cash flows are driven by technological risk only, the security’s market beta
is zero, and its present value must be:

574

VALUING FLEXIBILITY

PV =

0.5 ( 52.5 ) + 0.5 (10.5 )
1.05

= 30

We next replicate the project’s payoffs by finding the solution to the following equations, with N as the number of twin securities and B as the number
of $1 bonds in the portfolio:
52.5N + 1.05B = 4,500
10.5N + 1.05B = 0

The solution is N = 107.1 and B = −1,071.4, so the value of the replicating
portfolio leads to exactly the same result as with the DTA approach:9
107.1(30) − 1,071.4(1) = 2,143

When the key underlying risk is diversifiable, a straightforward DTA is an effective approach to value flexibility. Consider technological risks such as the
outcome of clinical drug trials, geological risks such as the size of an undeveloped oil field, or even some forms of marketing risk such as consumer acceptance of a new product. These risks are diversifiable, because the correlation of
the outcome with overall economic activity is low. And these risks can be far
more important for evaluating future investment decisions than the nondiversifiable risk as measured by the beta of the underlying asset (e.g., a successful
drug or developed oil field). For example, the driver of the investment decision in drug development is whether the drug passes the trials (technological
risk), not whether the drug—once successfully developed—is worth more or
less depending on general economic conditions (beta risk).
In this case, estimate the value of the project including flexibility by
discounting the underlying asset’s future cash flows and the investment requirement in each state of the world at their respective costs of capital, as in
equation 20.1. In the earlier example, we assumed the completed drug had a
zero beta, so we used the risk-free rate. In reality, the underlying asset is
more likely to have a nonzero beta. We can still apply DTA if the contingent
invesment decisions are not driven by this beta risk but by diversifiable risk
(e.g., the outcome of clinical trials). Then discount the asset’s cash flows at
the appropriate WACC and the investment cash flows at the risk-free rate in
each state of the world.10
If the underlying risk is not diversifiable and therefore priced in the financial markets, the DTA approach is more difficult to apply because it is unclear how to estimate the cost of capital correctly. In this case, only ROV
leads to the theoretically correct valuation. Sometimes a project’s cash
9
See also Dixit and Pindyck, Investment under Uncertainty (see note 3), pp. 30–32, for a similar
proof.
10
If nondiversifiable ( beta) risk does not make a difference in the invest ment decision, the DTA
approach leads to the same value as an ROV approach (see also note 7).

VALUATION BASED ON DECISION TREE ANALYSIS

575

flows are clearly correlated with commodity prices, such as in mining, the
oil industry, or power generation. The key underlying risk for an investment
decision is then often commodity price-related and not diversifiable. In this
case, use the ROV approach with the commodity as a twin security to correctly value the project.

Data availability: Traded versus untraded assets The results of an ROV
(and DTA) valuation critically depend on well-grounded estimates for the
value and the variance of the underlying asset.
If the estimate for the underlying asset value is inaccurate, the flexibility
value will also be inaccurate. Returning to our first example, if we misestimate the future cash flows generated by a highly effective drug, the value
of the option to defer will be inaccurate. In this simple example, we assumed a no-growth cash flow perpetuity. In practice, you would have to estimate the value with a full-fledged DCF model projecting sales growth,
operating margins, capital turnovers, and so on. All ROV (and DTA) approaches build on this valuation of the underlying asset.
A similar argument holds for estimates of the variance of the underlying
asset’s cash flows (called volatility in the option-pricing literature). Volatility can have a great impact on value because real options typically have
long lifetimes and are often “at the money” or close to it,11 meaning the decision of whether to undertake the project is a close call.12
To illustrate the impact of volatility on such options, consider the value
of a 10-year, at-the-money call option on a dividend-paying stock. Assume
the risk-free rate is 5 percent, the dividend yield is 2.5 percent, and the current price for the underlying stock is $100. The value of the call option
would be $27 based on a volatility of 20 percent and $35 for a volatility of 30
percent—a increase in value of almost 30 percent.13 Likewise, in the drug
development example, changes in variance significantly affect the option’s
value. Still, for many managers and practitioners, volatility remains an abstract concept: How do you reasonably estimate the range of cash flow outcomes14 from the sale of a product that has yet to be released?
Sometimes the underlying asset value and variance can be derived from
traded assets. Examples include options to shut down gas-fueled power generation, abandon a copper mine, or defer production of an oil field. In such
cases, because you can estimate the key inputs with reasonable accuracy,
ROV should be more accurate than DTA. Even then, accurately estimating
11

It follows from option-pricing theory that the sensitivity of option value to changes in variance
(referred to as vega) increases as the option’s lifetime increases and as the option is closer to the
money. An option is at the money if its exercise price equals the value of the underlying asset.
12
If the invest ment decision were a clear go or no-go, there would be little value in f lexibility in
the first place, and no need to consider the option value.
13
The results were obtained with a Black-Scholes option-pricing model. See, for example,
R. Brealey and S. Myers, Principles of Corporate Finance, 7th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003),
ch. 21.
14
The range needs to include the associated probabilities to provide a variance estimate.

576

VALUING FLEXIBILITY

underlying value and variance is not straightforward. Although short-term
volatility can be measured using commodity prices, it is the long-term
volatility that is important for real options (because they have long lifetimes). In fact, short-term volatility can be misleading. For example, the current volatility of spot prices for crude oil is not meaningful for the valuation
of a long-term, oil-related option. Extrapolating high short-term volatility
would suggest future oil prices that are unrealistically high or low.
When estimates for the underlying asset valuation and variance (volatility) cannot be derived from traded assets and are largely judgmental, a DTA
approach is more appropriate. It is more straightforward and transparent to
decision makers than the ROV approach. Transparency is especially important when critical valuation assumptions require the decision maker’s judgment. DTA captures the essence of flexibility value, and the theoretical
advantage of ROV is less important if required inputs are unavailable.

FOUR-STEP PROCESS FOR VALUING FLEXIBILITY
To value flexibility, use the four-step process illustrated in Exhibit 20.7. In
Step 1, conduct a valuation of the investment project without flexibility,
using a traditional discounted cash flow model. In Step 2, expand the DCF
model into an event tree, mapping how the value of the project evolves over
time, using unadjusted probabilities and the weighted average cost of capi-

Exhibit 20.7 Four-Step Process for Valuing Flexibility
Estimate
NPV without
flexibility

Model
uncertainty in
event tree

Objectives

Compute base case
present value
without flexibility

Comments

Standard NPV
approach
used for valuation
of underlying asset

Model
flexibility in
decision tree

Estimate
contingent
NPV

Understand how
present value
develops with
respect to changing
uncertainty

Analyze event tree
to identify and
incorporate
managerial flexibility
to respond to new
information

Value total
project using DTA
or ROV approach

No flexibility
modeled, valuation
using event tree
should equal
standard NPV

Flexibility is
incorporated into
event tree,
transforming it
into a decision tree

Under high
uncertainty and
managerial flexibility,
contingent NPV
will be significantly
higher than
standard NPV

REAL-OPTIONS VALUATION: NUMERICAL EXAMPLE

577

tal. At this stage, the model does not include flexibility, so the present value
of the project, based on the event tree, should equal the standard DCF value
from the first step.
In Step 3, turn the event tree into a decision tree by identifying the
types of managerial flexibility that are available. Build the flexibility into
the nodes of the tree. Multiple sources of flexibility are possible at a single
decision node, such as the option to abandon and expand, but it is important to have clear priorities among them. Be careful in establishing the sequence of decisions regarding flexibility, especially when the decision tree
has compound options.
Finally, Step 4 requires recognizing how the exercise of flexibility alters
the project’s risk characteristics. If (most of) the risk driving the contingent
cash flows is fully diversifiable, you need no special modeling and can use
DTA, discounting investment cash flows at the risk-free rate and the underlying project’s cash flows at the weighted average cost of capital, as in the
pharmaceutical example in the next section. If the risk is (mostly) nondiversifiable and priced in the market, the appropriate risk-adjusted discount
rate for the project’s cash flows is no longer the weighted average cost of
capital used in Step 1. In that case, use an ROV approach for the project
with flexibility, using a replicating portfolio or risk-neutral valuation.

REAL-OPTIONS VALUATION: NUMERICAL EXAMPLE
Using the four-step process, we illustrate the ROV approach with a straightforward binomial lattice. The results are identical to alternative option-pricing models that use more complicated mathematics such as stochastic
calculus.

Step 1: Estimate present value without flexibility Assume that an investment project generates cash flows whose present value (PV) equals $100,
volatility is 15 percent per year,15 and expected rate of return (Rk) equals 8
percent per year. The risk-free rate is 5 percent per year, and the cash outflow necessary to undertake the project, if we invest in it immediately, is
$105. Thus, the standard NPV is −$5, and we would not undertake the project if we had to commit today.
Step 2: Model uncertainty using event tree The lattice that models the
potential values of the underlying risky asset is called an event tree. It contains no decision nodes and simply models the evolution of the underlying
asset. To model changes in the value of the project, we can choose either of
two event trees: geometric or arithmetic. A geometric tree determines the
asset value in the next node by multiplying the value in the previous node
15

The standard deviation of the rate of change of the factory value.

578

VALUING FLEXIBILITY

Exhibit 20.8 Event Tree: Factory without Flexibility
$

t=4
t=3
t=2
t=1
t=0

116

157

38.2

116

28.5

100
86

86

20.5

135

100

100

212

182

157

135

116

t=5

Cumulative
probability
(percent)

74

86

10.6

64

2.0

47

0.1

Underlying asset
PV = 100
Volatility = 15%
Initial investment = 105
No flexibility NPV = 100 – 105 = (5)
Assumptions
Risk-free rate = 5%
Cost of capital = 8%

74
64
55

by a factor. The geometric tree has no upper bound, but is bounded below
by zero. An arithmetic tree determines the next node by adding (or subtracting) a value to the previous node. We prefer the geometric event tree
because its value cannot fall below zero.
Exhibit 20.8 illustrates potential values the project might take for each
of next five years. Defining T as the number of years per upward movement
and σ as the annualized volatility of the underlying project value, we can
determine the up-and-down movements by using the following formulas:16
Up Movement = u = e σ T
Down Movement = d =

1
u

Substitute numerical values into these formulas:
u = e 0.15 1 = 1.1618
d=

1
= 0.8607
1.1618

16
J. Cox, M. Rubinstein, and S. Ross, “Option Pricing: A Simplified Approach,” Journal of Financial Economics, 7(3) (1979): 229–263.

REAL-OPTIONS VALUATION: NUMERICAL EXAMPLE

579

Based on traditional DCF using an 8 percent cost of capital, the probability of an up movement is 72.82 percent, and the probability of a down
movement is 27.18 percent.17 As can be verified, the present value of any
branch in the event tree equals the expected payout discounted at the 8 percent cost of capital. Let’s take the uppermost branch in the fifth time period. Its present value is:
PVt= 4 =

E ( PVt= 5 )

(1 + R k )

=

( 0.7282 × 211.7 + 0.2718 × 156.8)
= 182.2
(1.08)

A similar calculation will produce any of the values in the event tree, resulting in a PV of the project of $100 at t = 0. That present value equals the result
in Step 1, so we know the tree is correct.

Step 3: Model flexibility using decision tree When we add decision
points to an event tree, it becomes a decision tree. Suppose the factory can
be expanded for an additional $15. The expansion increases the factory’s
value at that node by 20 percent. The option can be exercised at any time
during the next five years.
Exhibit 20.9 on page 580 shows the resulting decision tree. To find the
payouts at a given point on the tree, start with the final branches and work
backward through time. Consider the uppermost branch in period 5. On the
upward limb, the payout absent expansion would be 211.7, but with expansion, it is 1.20 × 211.7 − 15 = 239.0. Since the value with expansion is higher,
we would decide to expand. On the lower limb of that same node, the payout with expansion is 1.20 × 156.8 − 15 = 173.2, versus 156.8 without expansion, so again we would expand.
Step 4: Estimate value of flexibility To determine the value of the project
with the flexibility to expand, we work backward through the decision tree,
using the replicating portfolio method at each node. For the node highlighted in Exhibit 20.9, we can replicate the payoffs from the option to expand using a portfolio of N units of the underlying project18 and B units of
$1 risk-free bonds:
116.2N + 1.05B = 124.4
86.1N + 1.05B = 88.3
17

The formula for estimating the upward probability is:

([1 + R ] − d) = ([1 + 8%] − 0.8607 ) = 0.7282
T

k

(u − d)

1

(1.1618 − 0.8607 )

See note 16.
18
If the project itself is not traded but a traded twin security exists, we could construct the portfolio in a similar way with units of the twin security and risk-free bonds.

580

VALUING FLEXIBILITY

Exhibit 20.9 Decision Tree: Option to Expand Factory
$
t=5
t=4
t=3
t=2
t=1
t=0

204
173

175
148

149
126

127

124
106

107

108

90

91

239

77

88
75

65

64
55
47

Underlying asset values
PV+ 116
PV– 86
PV 100
Management decisions (t = 5)
124 = Max (116, 116 × 1.2 – 15)
88 = Max (86, 86 × 1.2 – 15)
Portfolio replication
N = (124 – 88) / (116 – 86)
B = (88 – 86 × N) / 1.05
N = 1.2; B = –14.3
Value of option (t = 4)
Option = Max (100 × N + B × 1, 100 × 1.2 – 15)
= Max (106, 105)
= 106

Decision to expand
Note: t = time, in years
PV = present value
N = number of replicating securities
B = number of risk-free bonds
Incremental investment: $20
Incremental payoff: 20%

Solving the equations, we find that N = 1.2, and B = −14.3. Therefore, a
replicating portfolio consists of 1.2 units of the project without flexibility
(at that node, valued at $100), plus a short position of 14.3 bonds worth $1.
As shown in Exhibit 20.9, the value of the option is then:
PV = 100N + 1B = 105.7

Working backward from right to left, node by node, we obtain a present
value of $108.4 for a project that has an option to expand. As a result, the net
present value of the project increases from −$5.0 to $3.4, so the option itself
is worth $8.4.
If instead, management had the option to abandon the factory at any
node for a fixed liquidation value of $100, the valuation would be as shown
in Exhibit 20.10. Again, work from right to left through the decision tree.
For the highlighted node, the value of the underlying factory is $116.2 in the
upward branch and $86.1 in the downward branch. Given the ability to do
so, the company would abandon the project for $100 in the downward
branch, so the payoffs in the decision tree are $116.2 in the upward and $100
in the downward branch. Using risk-neutral valuation this time, the abandonment option can be valued in this node at $104.9 as shown in Exhibit
20.10 (the exact same result a replicating portfolio would have generated).

REAL-OPTIONS VALUATION: NUMERICAL EXAMPLE

581

Exhibit 20.10 Decision Tree: Option to Abandon Factory
$
t=5
t=4
t=3
t=2
t=1
t=0

182
157

157
135

136
118

119

100

116
105

106

106

212

100
NE

100
NE

NE

NE
NE
NE

Underlying asset values
PV+ 116
PV– 86
PV 100
Management decisions (t = 5)
116 = Max (116, 100)
100 = Max (86, 100)
Risk-neutral valuation
p* = (1 + rf – d) / (u – d )
p* = (1.05 – 0.861) / (1.162 – 0.861)
p* = 0.629
Value of option (t = 4)
Option = Max ([p * × 116 + (1 – p* ) × 100] / 1.05, 100)
= Max (105, 100)
= 105

Decision to abandon
Note: NE = nonexisting state
t = time, in years
PV = present value
p* = binomial (risk-neutral) probability
u = upward movement of value
d = downward movement of value
rf = risk-free rate
Liquidation value: $100

Working backward through time, the value for a factory with the ability to
abandon is $106.4.
Multiple sources of flexibility can be combined within a single decision
tree, as illustrated in Exhibit 20.11 on page 582 using risk-neutral valuation.
The value of the project including the options to abandon and expand
would be $113.5, rather than $100.0, its stand-alone value without flexibility. With these options, the correct decision would be to accept the project.
Note that the value of the combined expansion-abandonment flexibility,
$13.5, is less than the sum of the individual flexibility values ($8.4 + $6.4 =
$14.8) but greater than either of them individually. The values of both options are not additive because they interact in complex ways (for example,
you cannot expand the factory once you have abandoned it).

Real-Options Valuation and Decision Tree Analysis:
A Numerical Example
In our next example, we show how to use a DTA or ROV approach for the valuation of a research and development project. Assume a company needs to
decide on whether to develop a new pharmaceutical drug. In our simplified

582

VALUING FLEXIBILITY

Exhibit 20.11 Decision Tree: Option to Expand or Abandon Factory
$
t=5
t=4
t=3
t=2
t=1
t=0

204
173

175
148

150
127

129

102

124
110

112

114

239

101
100

100
100

NE

NE
NE
NE

Decision to expand
Decision to abandon
Note: NE = nonexisting state
t = time, in years
PV = present value
p* = binomial (risk-neutral) probability
u = upward movement of value
d = downward movement of value
rf = risk-free rate
Liquidation value: $100
Incremental investment: $15
Incremental payoff: 20%

Underlying asset values
PV+ 116
PV– 86
PV 100
Management decisions (t = 5)
124 = Max (116, 100, 116 × 1.2 – 15)
100 = Max (86, 100, 86 × 1.2 – 15)
Risk-neutral valuation
p* = (1 + rf – d) / (u – d)
p* = (1.05 – 0.861) / (1.162 – 0.861)
p* = 0.629
Value of option (t = 4)
Option = Max ([p* × 124 + (1 – p* ) × 100] / 1.05,
100, 100 × 1.2 – 15)
= Max (110, 100, 105)
= 110

example,19 the first step in development is a research phase of three years, in
which the most promising chemical compounds are selected. The probability of success in the research phase is estimated at 15 percent. This is followed by a three-year testing phase, during which the compounds are
tested in laboratory and clinical settings. The chance of successfully completing the testing phase is 40 percent. If there are successful results, the
drug can be released in the market. On failure in any phase, the company
terminates development, and the product dies worthless.

Step 1: Estimate present value without flexibility If the development process is successful, the drug will have great value. Margins in the pharmaceutical industry are high, because drugs are protected against competition
through patents. If marketed today, a successful drug would generate annual sales of $1,950 million and a 45 percent EBITDA margin on sales for the
next 10 years until patent expiration. (Because prices drastically decline
after a patent expires, we do not count proceeds beyond that time.) Assum19
Pharmaceutical research and development are much more complex and consist of more phases
than shown in this example. For a more extensive example of valuing f lexibility in pharmaceutical research and development, see D. Kellog and J. Charnes, “Real-Options Valuation for a
Biotechnology Company.” (Note 1)

REAL-OPTIONS VALUATION: NUMERICAL EXAMPLE

583

ing a 30 percent tax rate and a 7 percent cost of capital, a marketable drug’s
present value as of today would be $4,314 million. However, the odds of successful development are small. The cumulative probability of success over
the research and testing phase is only 6 percent (0.15 × 0.40). The present
value of a drug that still needs to be developed and tested therefore amounts
to $259 million (0.06 × $4,314 million).
The investments needed to develop, test, and market a drug are high:
$100 million in the research phase, $250 million in the testing phase, and
$150 million in marketing. If we had to commit today to all three investments, we should not proceed because the NPV is negative:
Standard NPV = PV(Expected Cash Flows) − PV (Investments)
= 259 − 100 −

250
150
= −169
3 −
(1.05) (1.05)6

If management has the ability to abandon the project, however, the contingent NPV is significantly higher. To see this, we estimate the contingent
NPV with a straightforward DTA approach and then with the more sophisticated ROV approach.

Step 2 (DTA): Model uncertainty using event tree In this development project, the source of risk that drives the contingent cash flows is the technological
risk around the research and testing outcomes. We can model this uncertainty
using a straightforward event tree (see Exhibit 20.12 on p. 584). Note that the
tree shows all cash inflows and outflows at values discounted to today. For
example, the expected value of a marketable drug after six years is shown at
its present value as of today (t = 0) of $4,314 million (the expected value after
six years equals $4,314 compounded at 7 percent: $6,475). Since the investment
outlays are certain, they are discounted at the risk-free rate of 5 percent.20
Step 3 (DTA): Model flexibility using decision tree We next include the decision flexibility in the tree, working from right to left (see Exhibit 20.13 on p.
584). At the end of the testing phase, you have the option to invest $150 million
in marketing, which equals $112 million in today’s dollars. You should invest
only if testing has produced a marketable product, so the project’s value at
that point is Max[(4,314 − 112), 0] = $4,202 million. At the end of the research
phase, you have the option to proceed with the testing phase. If the research
phase fails, there is no point in proceeding, and if it is successful, you will proceed to testing only if the payoffs justify the incremental investment of $250
million (or $216 million discounted to today at the risk-free rate).
20
The assumption to discount invest ment outlays at the risk-free rate is also implicitly made in
the ROV approach later in this section.

584

VALUING FLEXIBILITY

Exhibit 20.12 Event Tree: Research and Development Option with
Technological Risk
$ million
Research phase

Testing phase

p=
p=

Success
15%

1–p=
85%
Failure

Success
40%

PV0(Drug) 4,314
(112)
Invest0

60%
Failure

Stop

Invest0 (216)

Invest0 (100)
1–p=

Marketing

Stop

Note: PV0(Drug) = present value of marketable drug discounted to t = 0 at WACC
Invest0 = investment discounted to t = 0 at risk-free rate
p = probability of technological success
Technological risk event

Step 4 (DTA): Estimate value of flexibility Because the technological risk
is fully diversifiable, we apply a DTA approach for the valuation of flexibility. The value of the option to proceed at the end of the research phase is
calculated as follows:
PV(Option) = Max[PV(Testing) − Inv(Testing), 0]

In this equation, PV(Testing) is the present value of proceeding with
testing, which equals the probability-weighted future payoffs:

Exhibit 20.13 Decision Tree: Research and Development Option with
Technological Risk
$ million
Research phase

Testing phase

p=
p=
NPV0

Success
15%

Success
40%

NPV0 = 4,202

NPV0 = 1,465
1–p=

120
1 – p = 85%
Failure

Marketing

NPV0 =

0

Note: PV0(Drug) = present value of marketable drug discounted to t = 0 at WACC
Invest0 = investment discounted to t = 0 at risk-free rate
NPV0 = net present value of development project discounted to t = 0
p = probability of technological success
Technological risk event

60%
Failure

NPV0 =

0

REAL-OPTIONS VALUATION: NUMERICAL EXAMPLE

585

PV(Testing) = 0.40(4,202) + 0.60(0) = 1,681

Inv(Testing), the investment requirement for the testing phase, equals $250
million or $216 million discounted to t = 0. Substituting, we can find the
present value of the development project prior to the testing phase:
PV(Option) = Max [(1,681 − 216), 0] = 1,465

These amounts need not be discounted further because they already
represent present value as of t = 0. Working farther from right to left in the
tree, we find the contingent NPV for the entire development project prior to
the research phase:
PV(Option) = Max[PV(Research) − Inv(Research), 0]
= Max[0.15(1,465) + 0.85(0) − 100, 0] = $120 million

This value is significantly higher than the standard NPV of −$169 million.

ROV approach: Technological and commercial risk Our analysis thus
far did not include the other source of uncertainty in the development
project: the commercial risk around the future cash flow potential of
the successfully developed and marketed drug. ROV is necessary to handle both technological and commercial risk. Step 1 is identical to the DTA
approach.
Step 2 (ROV): Model uncertainty using event tree We can model both
risks in a combined event tree (see Exhibit 20.14 on p. 586). In contrast to the
event tree in the DTA approach, the amounts in this tree do not represent
present values but future values that will need to be discounted when we
solve for the value of the option. For simplicity, we have chosen a one-step
binomial lattice to describe the evolution of the drug value over each threeyear period.21 Assuming an annual volatility of 15 percent, we can derive
the upward and downward movements, u and d, as follows:22
u = e σ T = e 0.15 3 = 1.30
d=

21

1
1
=
= 0.77
u 1.30

With more nodes, the tree quickly becomes too complex to show in an exhibit because it does
not converge in the technological risk. We also did the analysis with 10 nodes, but that did not
affect the results for this particular example.
22
See note 16.

586

VALUING FLEXIBILITY

Exhibit 20.14 Event Tree: Research and Development Option with
Technological and Commercial Risk
$ million
Research phase

Testing phase

Marketing
Value up PV(Drug) 7,254
Invest
(150)
86%

q=
p=
q=

Value up PV(Drug) 5,594
86%
Invest
(250)

1–q=
1–p=

p=

Success
40%
14%
PV(Drug) 4,314
Value down Invest
(150)

60%
Stop
Failure

Success
15%
q=

PV (Drug) 4,314
Invest (100)

1–p=

p=
1–q=

PV(Drug) 3,327
14%
(250)
Value down Invest
1–p=

85%
Stop
Failure

Value up PV(Drug) 4,314
Invest
(150)
86%

Success
40%
1 – q = 14%
PV(Drug) 2,566
Value down Invest
(150)
60%
Stop
Failure

Note: PV(Drug) = present value of marketable drug
Invest = investment
p = probability of technological success
q = probability of drug value increase
Technological risk event
Commercial risk event

The probability of an upward movement is 86 percent, and the probability of a downward movement is 14 percent.23 The value of a marketable drug
at the start of the research phase is $4,314 million. At the end of the research
phase, there are three possible outcomes: failure leading to a drug value of
zero, success combined with an increase in the value of a marketable drug
to $5,594 million, and success combined with a decrease in the value of a
marketable drug to $3,327 million. Following the same logic, there are six
possible outcomes after the testing phase.

Step 3 (ROV): Model flexibility using decision tree The logic underlying
the decision tree including commercial risk (see Exhibit 20.15) is the same as
under the DTA approach. For example, the payoff at the end of the testing
23

The formula for estimating the upward probability is:

( 1 + R ]  − d ) = (1.07 − 0.77 ) = 0.86
T

k

(u − d)

3

(1.30 − 0.77 )

Rk is the expected return on the asset. See also note 16.

REAL-OPTIONS VALUATION: NUMERICAL EXAMPLE

587

Exhibit 20.15 Decision Tree: Research and Development Option with
Technological and Commercial Risk
$ million
Research phase

Testing phase

Marketing
Value up
74%

NPV = 7,104

1 – q* = 26%
Value down

NPV = 4,164

q* =
p=
Value up
q* = 74%

Success
40%

NPV = 1,936

1 – p = 60%
NPV = 0
Failure
p=

NPV = 120

Success
15%

Value up
74%

NPV = 4,164

1 – q* = 26%
Value down

NPV = 2,416

q* =
p=

1 – q* = 26%
Value down

Success
40%

NPV = 1,029

1 – p = 60%
NPV = 0
Failure

1 – p = 85%
NPV = 0
Failure

Note: NPV = net present value of project
q* = binomial (risk-neutral) probability of an increase in marketable drug value
p = probability of technological success
Technological risk event
Commercial risk event

phase in the top branch equals Max[(7,254 − 150), 0] = 7,104. The primary
difference is that in the ROV version of the tree, we recognize the ability to
abandon development if the value of a marketable drug drops too much.

Step 4 (ROV): Estimate value of flexibility The commercial risk around
the drug’s future cash flows is not diversifiable,24 so we need to use an ROV
approach to include it in our valuation. In this example, we use risk-neutral
valuation. Therefore, we risk-adjust all probabilities of the upward and
downward movements for the drug’s value:

( 1 + r  − d) = (1.05 − 0.77 ) = 0.74
p* =
T

f

(u − d)

24

3

(1.30 − 0.77 )

Recall that we assumed the cost of capital for a marketed drug was 7 percent. Given our assumption for a risk-free rate of 5 percent, its beta must be different from zero.

588

VALUING FLEXIBILITY

Having applied the risk-neutral probabilities, we can now discount all
contingent payoffs at the risk-free rate, working from right to left in the
tree. Because the technological risk is fully diversifiable, there is no need to
adjust the probabilities for success and failure in research or testing.
For example, from Exhibit 20.15, the value of the option at the end of the
research phase after a downward movement of the drug value is expressed
as follows:
PV(Option) = Max[PV(Testing) − Inv(Testing), 0]

In this equation, PV(Testing) represents the value of proceeding with
testing at this node. It equals the value of the future payoffs weighted by
risk-neutral probabilities and discounted at the risk-free rate:

PV(Testing) =

 0.40 ( 0.74 × 4, 164 + 0.26 × 2 , 416 ) + 0.60 ( 0 ) 

(1.05)3

= 1, 279

Inv(Testing) equals $250, so the value of the development project at this
node is as follows:
PV(Option) = Max[(1,279 − 250), 0] = 1,029

We can solve for the other nodes in the same way. Working backward
through the tree, we estimate the contingent NPV at $120 million, the same
result we obtained in the DTA approach without commercial risk.
This is not surprising. A closer look at the decision tree reveals that the
uncertainty around the future marketable drug value is not significant
enough to influence any of the decisions in the development process. In this
example, the commercial risk makes no difference, even if we assume
higher volatility, such as 50 percent; an amount which exceeds the volatility
of many high-tech stocks. As we noted earlier, when nondiversifiable risk
(the drug’s commercial risk as measured by its beta) does not influence investment decisions, the DTA and ROV results are equivalent.
Moreover, in real situations the key uncertainty in drug development is
whether the drug proves to be an effective disease treatment without serious
side effects. The commercial risk is far less relevant, because a truly effective
drug almost always generates attractive margins. The example illustrates
that in such cases, it is more practical to focus on the technological risk entirely, using a DTA approach. Explicitly modeling the nondiversifiable (e.g.,
commercial) risk requires an ROV approach that is more complex and may
not even affect the valuation results.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

589

In general, when faced with multiple sources of underlying risk, carefully assess whether all these possible risks are important or whether one
dominates all others. Sometimes you can focus the valuation approach on
just one or two sources of uncertainty and greatly simplify the analysis.

SUMMARY
Managerial flexibility can substantially alter the value of a business because it lets managers defer or change investment decisions as the business
develops. Rigid use of standard DCF analysis fails to account for such flexibility in business decisions. Flexibility comes in many forms, such as the
option to defer, expand, contract, abandon, or switch projects on and off; we
have illustrated only a few applications in this chapter. Contingent-NPV
analysis, in the form of decision tree analysis (DTA) or real options valuation models (ROV), correctly captures the value of flexibility. Although the
ROV approach is theoretically superior to DTA, its application is more complex, so ROV is often limited to the valuation of flexibility in commoditybased industries (where commodity prices are measurable). In most other
cases, a careful DTA approach delivers results that are reasonably solid and
have the potential to provide more valuable insights.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Present the general decision rule for NPV. If a project has NPV = 0,
should a manager accept the project?
2. Define contingent NPV. Outline and explain the differences between
standard and contingent NPV.
3. Identify the value drivers embedded in a real option and how they
might interact.
4. Describe the DTA and ROV valuation models. How do these models
differ from the standard NPV model?
5. When and under what circumstances should a manager apply a standard, DTA or ROV approach to valuation?
6. Outline the four-step process for valuing flexibility.
7. It is often argued that the two most important real options available
to a manager evaluating investment decisions are the option to defer
an investment decision and the option to abandon an investment decision. Explain the significance of these two options. How could the
Black-Scholes model provide insight into these decisions?

590

VALUING FLEXIBILITY

8. Consider the project described in Exhibit 20.4 again. One could
argue that the flexibility to defer the investment decision until the
trial results are known reduces risk because the adverse outcome of
a $55 loss can be avoided. But we know that to correctly value the
flexibility in a DTA approach, we need to use a discount rate of 15.5
percent, which is above the 10 percent cost of capital for the project
without flexibility. How can lower risk lead to a higher discount
rate? Explain.

21
Cross-Border Valuation
To value companies outside your home country, follow the same principles
and methods that we presented in Part Two. However, some issues need
special attention:
• International accounting differences
• International taxation
• Translation of foreign-currency financial statements
• Forecasting cash flows in foreign and domestic currency
• Estimating the cost of capital in foreign currency
• Incorporating foreign-currency risk in valuations
In this chapter, we highlight each of these issues in terms of the steps
that require special analyses. Throughout the chapter, “domestic currency”
means the home currency of the person who is doing the valuation, and
“foreign currency” refers to the currency of the foreign entity to be valued.

INTERNATIONAL ACCOUNTING DIFFERENCES
International accounting differences are rapidly becoming less of an issue,
for two reasons. First, as of 2005, most major countries in Europe and
Asia have harmonized their accounting practices by adopting International
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS).1 Most other countries are expected
1
IFRS includes previous International Accounting Standards (IAS) and recently introduced
standards. Within the European Union, there is a temporary exception until 2007 for companies
that are traded in the United States and use U.S. GAAP, as well as for companies that have issued public debt.

591

592

CROSS-BORDER VALUATION

to adopt either IFRS or U.S. GAAP to facilitate international comparisons
and transparency for investors and analysts.
Second, IFRS and U.S. GAAP, which are now by far the two most common sets of accounting standards, have converged over recent years. In
2002, the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), which sets
the standards for IFRS, and its U.S. counterpart, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), agreed on a joint short-term convergence
project, as well as ongoing coordination. These efforts have led to various
amendments to existing standards in both IFRS and U.S. GAAP, as well as
the introduction of new standards to make the sets of guidelines more
comparable.
With the recent revision of IFRS becoming effective at the beginning of
2005, the major differences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP have disappeared.
However, when analyzing longer-term historical performance, you may
find that former differences still have an impact because companies usually
provide only a few years of results based on similar accounting principles
for comparison purposes.
In Chapter 7, we described how to reorganize a company’s financial
statements to estimate NOPLAT, invested capital, and free cash flow. If you
follow the recommendations in Chapter 7, you will get similar results regardless of the accounting principles used to prepare the financial statements. For example, the way we treat goodwill and its amortization in
NOPLAT and invested capital makes our concepts insensitive to whether
companies actually amortize goodwill. However, to make the proper adjustments, you need to understand how the company accounted for goodwill.
In the remainder of this section, we briefly describe the key differences
between the two major sets of accounting standards. The summary in Exhibit 21.1 compares IFRS and U.S. GAAP across the major items from the income statement and balance sheet.

Consolidation
Under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS, consolidation is determined by effective
control: if parent companies effectively control subsidiaries, these must be
consolidated. Under IFRS, what determines control is the substance of the
parent-subsidiary relationship, not necessarily the actual ownership or voting interest. U.S. GAAP typically assumes effective control when a parent
has the majority of voting rights, either directly or indirectly. However,
there are two exceptions. Accounting Research Bulletin (ARB) 51 indicates
that a majority voting interest does not lead to consolidation if there is significant doubt about the parent’s ability to control the subsidiary. It also
states that, in certain situations, control is achieved through arrangements
that do not involve voting stakes, so-called Variable Interest Entities (VIEs).

Exhibit 21.1 Key Differences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP
Principles
Consolidation

Translation

Income statement
Revenue recognition

• Consolidation requirements determined by majority of voting rights under U.S. GAAP
and based on control by parent under IFRS, which encompasses a broader set of
assessment criteria
• Joint ventures accounted for by proportional consolidation or equity method under
IFRS and by equity method under U.S. GAAP
• Statements of subsidiaries in hyperinflation economies based on temporal method
under U.S. GAAP and using current method with inflation adjustments under IFRS

• Differences only in industry-specific situations (for example, license revenues in
pharmaceutical industry)

Employee stock
options

• Expensed at fair value in income statement under IFRS as of January 2005 and
under U.S. GAAP planned as of December 2005

Balance sheet assets
Inventory

• U.S. GAAP allows LIFO approach for recording inventory, IFRS does not

Tangible fixed assets

• Upward revaluation allowed under IFRS, not under U.S. GAAP
• Capitalization of interest costs for self-constructed assets allowed under U.S. GAAP, not
under IFRS

Leases

• Differences mainly in lease classification—based on quantitative criteria under U.S.
GAAP—based on broader set of (partly) judgmental criteria under IFRS

Goodwill and acquired
intangible assets

• In-process R&D expensed under U.S. GAAP—recognized as goodwill or
intangible asset under IFRS
• Revaluation of acquired intangibles allowed under IFRS—not under U.S. GAAP

Other intangible
assets

• Under U.S. GAAP, research and development expenses cannot be capitalized, with
exception of some software and website development costs—under IFRS, research costs
are expensed and development costs can be capitalized under specific conditions

Impairment of goodwill
and long-lived assets

• Under IFRS, goodwill is tested for impairment before other assets—under U.S. GAAP,
individual assets are tested for impairment before goodwill impairment
• Reversal of impairment on long-lived assets allowed under IFRS in special conditions

Financial assets

• Broadly similar, with minor differences (for example, unlisted equity investments
“available for sale” are carried at historical costs under U.S. GAAP—at fair value
under IFRS)

Derivatives and hedge
accounting

• Similar principles with hedge accounting possible under both standards

Balance sheet liabilities
Provisions—general

Pensions

• Similar guidelines, but U.S. GAAP includes various standards for specific provisions
• U.S. GAAP requires recognition of low-end of range of possible outcomes, while IFRS
requires mid-range amount
• IFRS immediately recognizes additional expenditures due to plan amendments—U.S.
GAAP recognizes these over remaining employment period
• U.S. GAAP may require an additional minimum pension liability under specific
conditions

593

594

CROSS-BORDER VALUATION

In situations involving VIEs, the investor that absorbs the majority of the
economic gains or losses is required to consolidate.
Consolidation requirements for joint ventures differ. For cases of joint
control (situations where a contractual obligation exists to share control),
IFRS allows either proportional consolidation or application of the equity
method. U.S. GAAP allows only the application of the equity method, except
in specific circumstances.

Translation
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS apply the current method for the translation of financial statements of subsidiaries in moderate-inflation countries into the
currency of the parent company. For financial statements in hyperinflationary currencies, U.S. GAAP requires the so-called temporal method, but IFRS
requires an inf lation-adjusted current method. All methods are discussed in
more detail later in this chapter.

Revenue Recognition
General criteria for revenue recognition are similar, but U.S. GAAP has
more detailed guidelines for specific situations. An example of a difference
is for up-front payments related to revenue agreements, such as licensing
agreements between pharmaceutical companies. Pharmaceutical companies often license peer companies to market a particular product in a specific country. Such licensing agreements may include an initial payment up
front, which is immediately recognized as revenue under IFRS if it is neither
refundable nor conditional on future events. However, U.S. GAAP requires
booking the initial payment as deferred income on the balance sheet, recognizing the payment as revenue over the license period.

Employee Stock Options and Other Share-Based Payments
Both IFRS and U.S. GAAP require that the fair value of stock options
granted be recorded as a cost in the income statement (under U.S. GAAP
planned as of December 2005). Both standards require that the fair value
of the stock options be estimated with option-pricing models (e.g., BlackScholes or a binomial model), but neither standard requires a specific
method. U.S. GAAP already required the disclosure of the fair value of
granted stock options in the footnotes, and 115 companies in the S&P 500
had voluntarily adopted the newly proposed standard to expense stock
options in 2004. However, for non-U.S. companies, the disclosure requirements for employee stock options are entirely new, creating a difference
with historical accounts.

INTERNATIONAL ACCOUNTING DIFFERENCES

595

Inventory
The book value of inventory can be based on different methodologies: FIFO,
LIFO, or a weighted-average approach. IFRS does not allow a LIFO approach, but U.S. GAAP does. IFRS allows reversal of previous write-downs
in the inventory, if the value of inventory has increased. U.S. GAAP does
not allow reversals.

Tangible Fixed Assets
Under both IFRS and U.S. GAAP, the asset account for property, plant, and
equipment is usually recorded at historical cost net of accumulated depreciation. Both sets of standards may require a one-off reduction in the book
value (see impairment of long-lived assets later in this chapter) if the fair
value of the asset is less than the balance sheet value. However, IFRS also allows (upward) revaluation of the assets, which is prohibited under U.S.
GAAP. Not all European countries previously allowed revaluation of tangible fixed assets under local GAAP.
Another difference exists for interest costs associated with selfconstructed assets. These costs can be capitalized under U.S. GAAP but
must be expensed under IFRS.

Leases
The requirements for classification of leases into operating or capital/finance leases are conceptually similar under both accounting standards. For
example, a relatively long lease term and a high present value of the minimum lease payments relative to the asset’s fair value are indicators of a finance lease under both IFRS and U.S. GAAP. However, in contrast to IFRS,
U.S. GAAP stipulates specific criteria such as a lease term of 75 percent or
more of the asset’s economic life and a present value of lease payments of at
least 90 percent of the asset’s fair value. As discussed in Chapter 7, offbalance-sheet operating leases need to be adjusted by including the capitalized value in invested capital. Differences in accounting should therefore
have a minimal impact on the adjusted figures and the valuation results.

Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets
Accounting for business combinations (i.e., mergers and acquisitions) has
changed drastically under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS. Pooling of interest has
not been allowed under U.S. GAAP since 2001, and merger accounting, the
international standards equivalent, was already severely restricted and is
now completely abolished as of 2005. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS currently
allow only the purchase method for accounting of business combinations.
Any resulting goodwill from a transaction must be capitalized and will not

596

CROSS-BORDER VALUATION

be amortized over a fixed time period. Instead, companies must assess annually whether impairment of the book value of the goodwill is required
(see under impairment later in this section). This was introduced under
U.S. GAAP in 2001. Outside the United States, the treatment of goodwill
varied widely until the introduction of IFRS in 2005. In most countries,
companies were required to amortize goodwill. Some countries had already adopted IFRS for goodwill accounting so that no goodwill was
amortized. In a few countries, such as the Netherlands, goodwill could be
written off directly against equity in the year of the acquisition. Therefore,
long-term historical analysis still requires careful analysis and interpretation of reported goodwill.
Both standards allow recognition of acquired intangible assets on the
balance sheet if the intangibles are identifiable so that they can be distinguished from goodwill. Generally this will yield similar results under
IFRS and U.S. GAAP, but sometimes differences could occur. A key difference between U.S. GAAP and IFRS exists in the treatment of acquired inprocess R&D, which can be capitalized as goodwill or an acquired
intangible asset under IFRS but is usually expensed under U.S. GAAP.
Both standards will amortize acquired intangible assets with a definite
life, with indefinite-life assets being subject to impairment (discussed later
in this section). Furthermore, IFRS allows for (upward) revaluation of intangibles, which is not possible under U.S. GAAP.

Other Intangible Assets
The accounting treatment of intangible assets, such as patents, copyrights,
and customer lists, depends on how these assets were obtained. Intangible
assets that were acquired from other companies (e.g., licenses or purchased
customer lists) should be capitalized at historical cost and amortized over
their economic lifetime under both IFRS and U.S. GAAP. Internally generated intangible assets (e.g., brands, mastheads, publishing titles, and own
customer lists) cannot be capitalized. Under U.S. GAAP, only development
costs for software and Web sites that meet specific criteria can be capitalized. All other R&D expenditures must be expensed. Under IFRS, research
costs must be expensed. Development costs for intangible assets can be capitalized only under stringent conditions.

Impairment of Goodwill and Long-Lived Assets
As mentioned, goodwill on acquisitions is no longer amortized under U.S.
GAAP and IFRS. Instead, an annual impairment test is required for goodwill. This means companies have to determine whether the current economic value of an acquired company is no less than the book value of its net
assets plus goodwill (i.e., the original transaction price if no prior impair-

INTERNATIONAL ACCOUNTING DIFFERENCES

597

ment has occurred). Although the principle is similar, the impact of an impairment on the financial statements can differ under IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
IFRS requires a reduction in goodwill before any other assets are impaired
(on a pro rata basis for any remaining amount left), whereas U.S. GAAP first
requires assessment and reduction of individual assets before any goodwill
is impaired.
Impairment is not limited to goodwill but can also apply to other longlived assets, both tangible (e.g., net property, plant, and equipment) and intangible. IFRS and U.S. GAAP may use somewhat different approaches to
determine whether an impairment is required, but under both standards,
the estimated fair value of the asset is compared with its current book
value. Any impairment will be recognized in the income statement. IFRS allows reversal of the impairment if economic conditions have changed; such
a reversal is prohibited under U.S. GAAP.

Financial Assets
Both IFRS and U.S. GAAP require initial recording of financial assets at fair
value, with subsequent treatment depending on the classification of the
asset. Assets are classified as either “held-to-maturity,” “trading,” or
“available for sale.” This classification determines whether the book value
is market based (“available for sale” and “trading”) or based on historical
costs net of accrued amortization (“held-to-maturity”). Prior to the introduction of IFRS, many non-U.S. companies did not report financial assets at
their fair value.
The differences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP are minor. For example,
in the case of unlisted equity investments classified as “available for sale,”
U.S. GAAP requires the use of historical cost, whereas IFRS requires a fairvalue measurement.

Derivatives and Hedge Accounting
Both IFRS and U.S. GAAP require that derivatives be treated as financial assets and included on the balance sheet at fair value. This requirement also
holds for so-called embedded derivatives—derivative components of nonderivative contracts. The embedded derivatives need to be stripped from
their host contracts and reported separately on the balance sheet. Before
converting to IFRS, few non-U.S. companies followed this practice. Under
both standards, companies can use hedge accounting to avoid the profit-andloss impact of changes in the fair value of the derivative instruments. However, hedge accounting can be applied only under specific conditions. A key
condition is that the hedge is “effective,” meaning a change in the value of
the asset or liability that is hedged is indeed offset by an opposite change in

598

CROSS-BORDER VALUATION

the value of the derivative. The exact measures for hedge effectiveness differ somewhat between the two standards.

Provisions
U.S. GAAP and IFRS are broadly similar in their treatment of provisions in
terms of recognition requirements and their prohibition of the use of provisions to cover future operating losses. With IFRS being in line with U.S.
GAAP, the use of provisions has become much more restrictive for many
non-U.S. companies than before. Due to minor differences in formulating
probability requirements for recognizing provisions, timing between U.S.
GAAP and IFRS can be somewhat different. In addition, U.S. GAAP requires the use of the low end of a range of possible liabilities, whereas IFRS
requires midpoint estimates.
For restructuring provisions, IFRS requires recognition when a company is “demonstrably committed” to the restructuring because of either a
legal or a constructive obligation (e.g., it has started to implement a plan already). Under U.S. GAAP, a restructuring provision must meet the definition of a liability, so there must be a high likelihood that the plan will not
change and/or that the company will not withdraw the plan.

Pensions and Other Postemployment Benefits
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require the recognition of a provision or liability
for retirement-related benefits where the company carries the risk (e.g.,
because of guaranteed payments). This requirement typically holds for
defined-benefit pension plans, as well as medical benefits in the United
States. Both standards use similar approaches in establishing the retirementrelated liability and expense. Changes in actuarial assumptions affect the
value of retirement-related assets and liabilities. Both standards require
recognition in the income statement only if the cumulative gains or losses
exceed a certain range.
There are some differences. IFRS immediately recognizes additional expenses due to plan amendments, whereas U.S. GAAP amortizes these costs
over the remaining employment period. In addition, U.S. GAAP requires an
additional minimum pension liability if the accumulated benefit obligation
( based on current or past compensation levels) exceeds the fair value of the
plan assets. Finally, proposals are being discussed under IFRS to have all
actuarial gains and losses run through the income statement without the
application of the range mentioned earlier.
The impact of accounting for retirement-related liabilities under IFRS
on European companies will differ from country to country. In some European countries (including Belgium and Sweden) the government, rather
than the company, provides for pensions. For companies in these countries,

INTERNATIONAL TAXATION

599

the new accounting rules for retirement-related liabilities have limited impact. In other countries, including Germany, companies are not required
to have funded pension plans. In those cases, the balance sheet typically
already reflects an actuarial value of the liability, but under IFRS this
value will be measured differently. In other countries, such as the Netherlands, companies are required to have funded pension plans. In these
cases, the liability on the balance sheet used to reflect only the outstanding obligation to the pension fund (e.g., for underfunding). From 2005 onward, European companies have to report a net liability or asset based on
the fair value of the plan assets and liabilities, similar to the way U.S. companies report on their pension plans (although the recognition of any
gains or losses in the income statement is somewhat different, as described earlier).

INTERNATIONAL TAXATION
Taxation of corporate income and profit distributions differs across countries. Even so, for the purpose of analyzing historical financial performance, we can ignore most of these differences. By ignoring taxation and
comparing pretax performance, we can generate the desired insights into
the company’s true economic performance. However, for valuation purposes, a proper understanding of the tax situation is crucial. All tax benefits
and expenses represent a certain value or claim and need to be included in
the stand-alone valuation of the entity.
To address international differences in taxation, you need to answer a
few key questions:
• What are the relevant tax rate and taxable income?
• Can fiscal grouping be applied to offset profits and losses of different entities?
• What are the relevant cross-border taxation issues?
• How does taxation affect shareholders in different countries?

Relevant Tax Rate and Taxable Income
To estimate taxes on projected future income, you need to understand what
the relevant tax rate is and what amount of profit is actually taxable. Some
countries have one corporate tax rate. In others, including the United
States, there is a federal tax rate and a state tax rate. Some countries have
special surtaxes that increase the average tax rate for companies. In addition, some profit that is taxed in one country may not be taxable in another.

600

CROSS-BORDER VALUATION

For example, for companies in the Netherlands profits from nonconsolidated subsidiaries are tax-exempt if the parent company has an equity stake
of more than 20 percent.

Fiscal Grouping
Many countries offer the possibility of fiscal grouping—that is, preparing
consolidated tax filings for a group of companies that are directly or indirectly owned by the same parent company (ownership level requirements
differ by country). If a specific company in the group generates a profit, it
can offset that profit against losses from other group companies, or vice
versa. The amount of taxes that a company would pay on a stand-alone basis
can therefore differ from what it actually pays as part of a fiscal group. Although many countries allow consolidated taxation for a group of resident
companies, this is, in general, not possible for a group of companies in different jurisdictions. In the case of mergers and acquisitions, fiscal grouping
can be important. For example, if fiscal grouping is not possible between
the acquirer and the target company, any tax loss carry-forwards in the target need to be earned back through future profits of the target company itself, and the acquirer will not have the benefit of directly offsetting these
losses against its own taxable income.

Cross-Border Taxation
Even if an international group of companies is not able to achieve a consolidated tax status, cross-border taxation does not necessarily cause profits to
be fully taxed multiple times. Relief may come through tax exemptions, tax
credits, and tax treaties. When exemptions apply, profits from foreign subsidiaries that were already taxed abroad are exempt from domestic taxation
for the parent. The European Parent-Subsidiary Directive prohibits European Union member states from taxing profits distributed by a subsidiary
from another member state. Also, the directive makes profit distributions
exempt from withholding taxes in the member state of the subsidiary. In
other cases, countries provide tax credits to avoid double taxation. Finally,
bilateral tax treaties can reduce or even eliminate withholding taxes on dividend, interest, or royalty payments.
Consider Exhibit 21.2, a simplified case of tax credits for a U.S.-based
company. The assumed local tax rates are 34 percent on U.S. income, 20 percent on income in country X, and 60 percent on income in country Y. U.S.
taxes are computed as 34 percent of consolidated pretax income less foreign
tax credits that may not exceed 34 percent of foreign income. Whenever foreign tax credits reach the maximum allowable under U.S. law, as in the top
half of Exhibit 21.2, consolidated taxes paid equal the total of local taxes,

INTERNATIONAL TAXATION

601

Exhibit 21.2 Tax Calculation for a US Company with and without Foreign
Tax Credits
1. With excess foreign tax credits
U.S.
Pretax income
1,000
Local tax rate
34%
Local taxes
340
U.S. tax rate
Preliminary U.S. taxes
Foreign tax credits1
Net U.S. taxes
Foreign taxes
Consolidated income taxes
Total local taxes
Corporate tax penalty

2. Without excess foreign tax credits
U.S.
Pretax income
1,000
Local tax rate
34%
Local taxes
340
U.S. tax rate
Preliminary U.S. taxes
Foreign tax credits1
Net U.S. taxes
Foreign taxes
Consolidated income taxes
Total local taxes
Corporate tax penalty

Country X
200
20%
40

Country Y
300
60%
180

Group
1,500
–
34%
510
(170)
340
220
560
(560)
0

Country X
400
20%
80

Country Y
100
60%
60

Group
1,500
–
34%
510
(140)
370
140
510
(480)
30

1

Foreign tax credit is the foreign taxes paid or the foreign income times U.S. tax rate, whichever is lower.

and no corporate tax penalty is levied. When tax credits are below the maximum allowable, as in the bottom half of Exhibit 21.2, consolidated taxes exceed the total of local taxes, and a U.S. corporate tax penalty is levied. In
effect, the U.S. Tax Code may raise the effective tax rate for subsidiaries located in lower-tax countries.
The effective tax rate for a subsidiary in a foreign country may not be its
domestic statutory rate, because, given the specific circumstances, it may
depend on the parent company’s tax rate. In the second scenario in Exhibit
21.2, the U.S. Tax Code has raised the average effective tax rate to the parent
company on income in country X from 20 percent to (30 + 80)/400 = 27.5
percent. The marginal effective tax rate on country X income is 34 percent,
the U.S. tax rate. If the parent expected this situation to persist, it might be
better off selling company X to an owner from country X. Note that these examples are simplified. Any tax credit or penalty is settled only upon repatriation of foreign profits to the United States, which is why U.S. corporations

602

CROSS-BORDER VALUATION

have significant profits locked up in foreign entities. The U.S. government
has therefore created a special tax facility for efficient repatriation of foreign profits in 2004 and 2005.

Taxation of Shareholders in Different Countries
Differences in taxation of dividends and capital gains have an impact on the
effective taxes paid by shareholders. If shareholders pay taxes on dividends
received, the dividends are effectively taxed twice: first by corporate income tax, and second by personal income tax on the dividends. Many countries have integrated corporate and personal tax systems to eliminate some
or all of the double taxation on dividends to shareholders. Mechanisms to
reduce double taxation may affect companies’ value.
Some countries use a dividend imputation system that gives shareholders a tax credit for some or all of the corporate taxes that the company has
already paid. Dividend imputation effectively increases cash flow to shareholders by decreasing the amount of taxes received by the government. This
cash flow may take the form of a tax reduction or of a tax refund, depending
on the shareholder’s overall tax liability. Exhibit 21.3 shows the calculation of
tax credits under the United Kingdom’s dividend imputation system and the

Exhibit 21.3 How Dividend Imputation Works
Classic
(double taxation)
Corporate tax rate
30.0%
Tax credit (rate on net dividend)
0.0%
Dividend payout ratio
40.0%
Shareholder tax rate
33.0%

1

Dividend
imputation
30.0%
11.0%
40.0%
33.0%

Company cash flow
Earnings before taxes
Corporate taxes
Net income
Cash dividend paid

100.0
(30.0)
70.0
28.0

Shareholder taxation
Shareholder tax base1

28.0

31.1 (=28.0 × 1.11)

Shareholder taxes
Tax credit
Taxes (paid) received

(9.2)
–
(9.2)

(10.2) (=31.1 × 0.33)
3.1 (=28.0 × 0.11)
(7.1)

Shareholder cash flows
Cash dividend received
Taxes (paid) received
Net cash to investor

28.0
(9.2)
18.8

28.0
(7.1)
20.9

100.0
(30.0)
70.0
28.0

Actual cash dividend grossed up by the tax credit rate under the dividend imputation system.

TRANSLATION OF FOREIGN-CURRENCY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

603

resulting differences in net cash flows to investors. Under the classic system,
with double taxation, shareholders pay 33 percent tax on the cash dividends
received, versus 25 percent under the imputation system.
Most imputation systems provide only partial imputation of taxes paid,
and the net impact is relatively small, as the example of the U.K. system
shows ( because the tax credit is only 11 percent). Therefore, in practice,
there is often no need for any adjustment to the cash flows or the discount
rate to capture the imputation impact in the valuation. More importantly,
many shareholders will not even benefit from the imputation system. For
the majority of companies, the shareholder base is diverse in terms of foreign and domestic shareholders as well as institutional and retail investors.
Dividend imputation matters less for share prices if the price-setting investors are institutional investors or foreign investors who do not benefit
from the dividend tax credit.

TRANSLATION OF FOREIGN-CURRENCY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Analyzing the historical performance of foreign subsidiaries is best done in
the currency of that subsidiary to avoid distortion from currency translation.
But in many cases this is not possible because the subsidiary’s statements are
translated in the parent’s currency and included (or consolidated) in the parent’s accounts. For example, an English subsidiary of a European corporate
group would always prepare financial statements in British pounds. When
the European parent company prepares its financial statements, it translates
the British pound statements of the English subsidiary at the current europound exchange rate. If the exchange rate fluctuates from year to year, the European parent company reports the same asset at a different euro amount each
year, even if the asset’s value in pounds sterling has not changed. The statements of the English subsidiary in the parent’s reporting currency would suggest a cash expenditure because of the change in asset value, even though no
cash has been spent and the change is solely due to a change in exchange rate.
Therefore, following the guidelines from Chapter 7, a correction to the cash
flow is needed that is equal to the gains/losses from currency translation.
Overseeing U.S. GAAP and IFRS, there are three approaches to translating the financial statements of foreign subsidiaries into the parent company’s currency. Exhibit 21.4 on page 604 shows the approaches used under
U.S. GAAP and IFRS for so-called moderate-inflation countries and hyperinflationary countries: the current method, temporal method, and inflation-adjusted current method.
For subsidiaries in moderate-inflation countries, translation of the financial statements into the currency of the parent company is fairly
straightforward. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS apply the so-called current
method. All balance sheet items except equity are translated at the year-end

604

CROSS-BORDER VALUATION

Exhibit 21.4 Currency Translation Approaches
U.S. GAAP

IFRS

Current method

Current method

Hyperinflation Temporal method

Inflation-adjusted
current method

Moderate inflation

exchange rate. Translation gains and losses on the balance sheet are recognized in the equity account and do not affect net income. The average exchange rate for the period is used for translating the income statement.
In the case of hyperinflationary economies, IFRS and U.S. GAAP differ
in terms of when hyperinflation is assumed, whether statements are adjusted for inflation, and what approach is used to translate the financial
statements. U.S. GAAP defines hyperinflation as cumulative inflation over
three years of approximately 100 percent or more. IFRS states that this is one
indication but also suggests considering other factors such as local investor
preference to keep wealth in nonmonetary assets or stable foreign currency.
U.S. GAAP requires the so-called temporal method for translating the
financial statements in hyperinflationary currencies. All items in the financial statements are translated at the exchange rate at transaction date. This
means historical exchange rates for items carried at historical cost, current
exchange rates for monetary items, and year-average or other specific exchange rates for other balance sheet items and the income statement. Any
resulting currency gains or losses are reported on the income statement of
the parent.
Under IFRS, the translation approach for subsidiaries in hyperinflationary countries is similar to that for moderate-inflation countries. The key
difference is that before translation, IFRS requires the hyperinflationary
statements to be restated to current (foreign) currency units based on a general price index. All items except some monetary items are restated for the
estimated impact of inflation. This generally requires judgment and will
also depend on specific agreements and contracts (e.g., debt financing may
or may not be linked to an index). The restatement results in a gain or loss on
the subsidiary’s income statement. Because the full statements are restated
at current (year-end) foreign currency units, the year-end exchange rate is

FORECASTING CASH FLOWS IN FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC CURRENCY

605

Exhibit 21.5 Currency Translation
Local
currency

Balance sheet
Cash and receivables
Inventory
Net fixed assets

Current liabilities
Long-term debt
Equity
Common stock
Retained earnings
Foreign currency
adjustment

100
300
600
1,000

Current
method
Foreign
exchange
rate
US $
0.85
85
0.85
255
0.85
510
850

Temporal
method
Foreign
exchange
rate US $
0.85
85
0.90
270
0.95
570
925

265
600

0.85
0.85

225
510

0.85
0.85

225
510

265
684

0.85
0.85

225
581

100
35

0.95

95
32

0.95

95
95

100
56

0.95

95
48

925

1,105

135
(65)
(19)
(9)

161
(75)
(23)
(11)

0.85
0.85
0.85
0.85

137
(64)
(20)
(9)

66
108
(13)
95

20 1
72
(16)
56

0.85

17
61
(13)
48

(12)
850

1,000
Income statement
Revenue
Cost of goods sold
Depreciation
Other expenses, net
Foreign exchange
gain/(loss)
Income before taxes
Income taxes
Net income

150
(70)
(20)
(10)

50
(15)
35

0.90
0.90
0.90
0.90

0.90

135
(63)
(18)
(9)

45
(13)
32

0.90
0.93
0.95
0.90

0.90

Inflation-adjusted
currency method
Foreign
exchange
Adjusted
rate
US $
100
0.85
85
321
0.85
273
684
0.85
581
1,105
939

(10)
939

0.85

1

Gain from restatement.

used to translate both the balance sheet and the income statement. Any
translation effects will be included in the equity account of the parent.
Exhibit 21.5 shows an example of currency translation under the three
approaches. In this example, the exchange rate has changed from 0.95 at the
beginning of the year to 0.85 at the end of the year, consistent with 14 percent inflation in the foreign country during the year and U.S. inflation of 2
percent. The average exchange rate for the year is 0.90. As the exhibit illustrates, the three approaches can result in significantly different amounts for
net income and equity in the parent company’s currency.

FORECASTING CASH FLOWS IN FOREIGN AND
DOMESTIC CURRENCY
To value a company with international operations, first forecast the components of cash flow in their most relevant currency. This means forecasting
the British pound cash flows in British pounds, the Swiss franc cash flows

606

CROSS-BORDER VALUATION

Exhibit 21.6 Consistent Monetary Assumptions for Cost of Capital
Estimates and Cash Flow Projections
Domestic inflation and interest rates
Term structure estimates (percent)
Nominal risk-free rate
Inflation rate
Real risk-free rate
Annual estimates (percent)
Nominal risk-free rate
Inflation rate
Real risk-free rate

Year
1

2

3

4

5

15.4
12.0
3.0

13.8
10.5
3.0

12.6
9.3
3.0

11.5
8.2
3.0

10.4
7.2
3.0

Use nominal risk-free rate plus
risk premium in domestic cost
of capital estimates

15.4
12.0
3.0

12.3
9.0
3.0

10.2
7.0
3.0

8.2
5.0
3.0

6.1
3.0
3.0

Use annual inflation rates when
forecasting domestic company
results and cash flows

0.92

0.86

0.81

0.78

0.76

Use forward foreign exchange
rates for conversion of future
domestic and foreign cash flows

Foreign inflation and interest rates
Term structure estimates (percent)
Nominal risk-free rate
Inflation rate
Real risk-free rate

9.2
6.0
3.0

8.7
5.5
3.0

8.3
5.2
3.0

8.0
4.9
3.0

7.6
4.5
3.0

Use nominal risk-free rate plus
risk premium in foreign cost of
capital estimates

Annual estimates (percent)
Nominal risk-free rate
Inflation rate
Real risk-free rate

9.2
6.0
3.0

8.2
5.0
3.0

7.6
4.5
3.0

7.1
4.0
3.0

6.1
3.0
3.0

Use annual inflation rates when
forecasting foreign company
results and cash flows

International foreign exchange rates
Foreign exchange rate estimates
Forward foreign exchange rate
Spot foreign exchange rate
1.00

in Swiss francs, and so on, before combining them into a set of financials for
the entire company. In practice, this is an iterative process: You cannot forecast the individual line items without considering how they affect the other
line items in the forecast. You need a coherent, integrated forecast that reflects the competitive dynamics of the business operations.
The assumptions underlying your forecasts of financial results in domestic or foreign currency and cost of capital must all be consistent. Exhibit 21.6
shows how some fundamental monetary assumptions should be defined in a
consistent way to avoid any biases in the valuation results.
For domestic-currency projections, work from a single set of monetary
assumptions for annual inflation and risk-free real interest rates, which
together define the term structure of nominal interest rates. Whenever
possible, base the interest rate assumptions on market quotes. All cash
flow projections and cost-of-capital estimates in domestic currency should
be based on this single set of monetary assumptions to avoid inconsisten-

FORECASTING CASH FLOWS IN FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC CURRENCY

607

cies in the valuation. For example, if future inflation rates underlying sales
forecasts are around 10 percent per year but the cost of capital estimates
are built on long-term interest rates that reflect inflation declining toward
5 percent, the resulting DCF value will be too high.
Foreign-currency projections require a similar set of assumptions.
Given the domestic and foreign sets of monetary assumptions, the forward
exchange rates between both currencies are set (see the following discussion). To ensure consistent valuation results, always use these forward exchange rates when converting future cash flows from one currency into
another. If market quotes are available for longer-term forward exchange
rates, test your assumptions against them. If there are significant deviations, it probably means that your assumptions for the domestic or foreign
inflation or interest rate do not reflect market expectations and should
be revised.
A company valuation should always lead to the same result regardless
of the currency or mix of currencies in which cash flows are projected. Use
one of the following two methods for forecasting and discounting foreign
currency cash flows:
1. Spot-rate method: Project foreign cash flows in foreign currency, and
discount these at the foreign cost of capital. Then convert the present
value of the cash flows into domestic currency, using the spot exchange rate.
2. Forward-rate method: Project foreign cash flows in foreign currency,
and convert these into domestic currency using the forward exchange rates. Then discount the converted cash flows at the cost of
capital in domestic currency.
We first illustrate both methods with a simple example (see Exhibit 21.7
on p. 608). Assume a German company generates significant risk-free cash
flows in Switzerland. Using the spot-rate method, simply project cash flows
in Swiss francs and discount them at the Swiss risk-free interest rate. The resulting present value is CHF 568. Converting this value at the spot exchange
rate of 1.533 Swiss francs per euro results in €366.
The forward-rate method is more complex. The projected cash flows in
Swiss francs should be converted to euros on a year-by-year basis using forward rates and then discounted at the euro risk-free rate. As a practical
matter, for most currencies, forward exchange rates are not available beyond 18 months. This means that you need to estimate synthetic forward
exchange rates by using interest rate parity.
The interest-rate-parity theory is based on the idea that changes in foreign exchange rates are related to the ratio of expected inflation rates
between two countries. Exhibit 21.8 on page 609 plots the relationship between domestic inflation and domestic interest rates for 38 countries from

608

CROSS-BORDER VALUATION

Exhibit 21.7 Spot-Rate and Forward-Rate Method for Foreign Cash Flows
Year
0
Interest rates
rF—Swiss sovereign
interest rate (percent)
rD—Euro sovereign
interest rate (percent)
(1+rF )/(1+rD )
Exchange rates
X0—spot rate CHF/€
Xt—estimated forward
rate CHF/€
1. Spot rate method
Cash flow in CHF
Discount factor from rF
Present value in CHF
Sum of cash flow in CHF
Sum of cash flow in €
2. Forward rate method
Cash flow in €
Discount factor from rD
Present value in €
Sum of cash flows in €

1

2

3

4

5

0.9

1.5

2.2

2.4

2.9

2.3

2.9

3.4

3.9

4.2

0.9863

0.9730

0.9656

0.9435

0.9392

1.532

1.511

1.500

1.465

1.459

110.3
0.991
109.3

115.8
0.971
112.4

121.6
0.937
113.9

127.6
0.909
116.1

134.0
0.867
116.2

72.0
0.978
70.4

76.6
0.944
72.4

81.1
0.905
73.3

87.1
0.858
74.7

91.9
0.814
74.8

1.553

105.0

567.7
365.6

365.6

Note: CHF = Swiss franc.

1995 to 2004. The exhibit shows that inflation differences explain most of
the difference in nominal interest rates.
Across countries, the interest-rate-parity theory is expressed as follows.
The forward foreign exchange rate in year t, Xt, is equal to the current spot
rate, X0, multiplied by the ratio of nominal interest rates in the two countries over the forecast interval, t:
 1 + rF 
Xt = X 0 × 
D 
1 + r 

t

where rF = Interest rate in foreign currency
rD = Interest rate in domestic currency
To illustrate the theory for a single year, suppose that the German company can borrow one-year money in Switzerland at a 0.9 percent nominal
interest rate, rF, while the borrowing rate in euros, rD, is 2.3 percent. The spot
exchange rate, X0, is 1.553 Swiss francs per euro, and the one-year forward

FORECASTING CASH FLOWS IN FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC CURRENCY

609

Exhibit 21.8 Relationship between Inflation and Interest Rates
30

Average interest rate1, 1995–2004

25

20

15

10

5

0
0

5

10

15

20

Average inflation2, 1995–2004
1
Money market rate.
2

Consumer price inflation.
Note: Sample of 38 countries in North and Latin America, Western and Eastern Europe and Asia Pacific.
Source: IMF International Financial Statistics.

rate, X1, is 1.532 Swiss francs per euro. We can use interest rate parity to estimate the equivalent euro borrowing rate for a 0.9 percent borrowing rate
in Switzerland:
1.553 
(1 + r ) = XX × (1 + r ) =  1.532
 × (1.009) = 1.023
D

0

F

t

No practical difference exists between borrowing in euros at 2.3 percent or
in Swiss francs at 0.9 percent. The foreign borrowing rate, when converted
to a domestic equivalent rate, is usually close to the domestic rate (unless
there are tax implications).
We can use interest rate parity to estimate forward exchange rates by
multiplying the ratio of nominal interest rates by the current spot rate. The
Swiss franc cash flows are converted to euro cash flows by using the forward exchange rates. Using the euro interest rates to discount the converted

610

CROSS-BORDER VALUATION

cash flows, we obtain a present value of €366, exactly the same value as we
obtained under the spot-rate method.

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL IN FOREIGN CURRENCY
The most important aspect of estimating costs of capital for foreign entities is to ensure consistency between the currency of the cash flow and
the currency of the discount rate. In all other respects, estimating the
WACC for a foreign entity is the same as estimating the WACC for a domestic entity. If cash flow is predicted in units of the foreign currency, it
should be discounted at a foreign-currency discount rate. The expected inflation that drives the foreign-currency cash flows should equal the expected inflation included in the foreign-currency WACC through the
risk-free rate, following consistent monetary assumptions as explained in
Exhibit 21.6. Nevertheless, we regularly come across foreign-currency valuations done at the domestic-currency WACC (e.g., when parent companies
use their own WACC to value foreign-currency cash flow projections of
subsidiaries).

Local Market Risk Premium and Beta
The cost of capital is best estimated from the perspective of a global investor
(see Chapter 10). This means that both the market risk premium and beta
should be measured against a global market portfolio and not against a local
(foreign or domestic) market portfolio.
Our reasoning is based on the globalization of capital markets. A considerable share of all equity trades is international. These global traders, primarily large institutional investors, draw their capital from and invest it all
over the world. If expected premiums were significantly different across
countries (on a risk-adjusted basis), you would expect to see significant
flows to countries with higher-than-average premiums and away from
lower-than-average premiums. That is difficult to argue. In theory, such a
movement would also tend to re-equalize premiums.
Application of a global market risk premium also makes intuitive sense.
Consider the consumer goods companies Procter & Gamble and Unilever.
Both sell their household products globally with roughly the same geographic spread. The shares of both are traded in the United States and Europe. The primary difference is that Procter & Gamble is domiciled in the
United States, and Unilever is domiciled in the United Kingdom and the
Netherlands. With similar investor bases, it would be odd if the two companies had different costs of capital.
Given this reasoning, how do we account for different realized premiums? Exhibit 21.9 compares the realized premiums on stock market indexes

ESTIMATING THE COST OF CAPITAL IN FOREIGN CURRENCY

611

Exhibit 21.9 Comparing Realized Returns, 1900–1999
Annualized returns
Real equity returns
France

Premium versus Treasury Bills (1-year)

4.0

7.4
7.6

Australia
5.0

Japan
Italy

7.2
7.1

2.7

6.8
8.2

Sweden

6.2

6.9

USA

5.8

Netherlands

5.9

5.0

UK

5.9

4.9

6.4

Canada
Germany1

3.7

4.3
5.5

Ireland

4.2

5.0

Switzerland

Denmark

4.3
4.7

Spain

Belgium

4.7

3.9

2.7

3.1
5.1

2.2

1

Excludes the years 1922–1923.
Source: E. Dimson, P. Marsh, and M. Staunton, Millennium Book II, 101 Years of Investment Returns, 2001.

with government bond returns for a number of countries. These numbers are
from Dimson, Marsh, and Staunton’s analysis of long-term average returns
on equities, corporate bonds, and short-term government bonds.2
Realized returns vary considerably depending on the time period over
which they are measured. Exhibit 21.9 shows that even for a 100-year period, realized returns can still vary a lot. One driver is the difference in
economic development over the last century for the countries listed. Furthermore, some of the markets may have shown limited integration with
international capital markets in the past, depending on the major companies traded on each of the exchanges. Therefore, the historical data
may not properly represent the current situation. More important is the
argument that these market indexes do not represent large, diversified
portfolios. In particular, the key stock market indexes in the majority of
European countries typically include only 25 to 40 companies but account
2
E. Dimson, P. Marsh, and M. Staunton, Millennium Book II: 101 Years of Investment Returns (ABN
AMRO and London Business School, 2001).

612

CROSS-BORDER VALUATION

for the majority of total capitalization of the stock market. Research has
shown that a large fraction of the returns on European market indexes
could be explained by industry composition, as most indexes consisted of a
limited number of companies (see Exhibit 21.10).3 Exhibit 21.11 on page 614
shows some more recent data on several stock markets: Smaller stock markets are dominated more by individual stocks and sectors, whereas larger
markets and the S&P 500 Index are much more diversified.
Ideally, the global market risk premium is based on a global market
index such as the MSCI World Index. Unfortunately, global indexes typically do not go far back in time, so long-term estimates of historical market
risk premiums are not available. Therefore, we typically resort to the welldiversified U.S. market. Correlation between the S&P 500 and the global
market index (e.g., MSCI World Index) has been very high, so the S&P 500
Index is a good proxy. Since we are using a global market risk premium, we
should also use a global beta. Local market indexes of many countries are
biased toward certain companies and/or industries. Therefore, a beta measured relative to a local market index does not necessarily represent the risk
contribution of that stock to a diversified, global portfolio.

Ad Hoc Risk Adjustments
Although many practitioners make ad hoc adjustments to the discount rate
to reflect political risk, foreign-investment risk, or foreign-currency risk, we
do not recommend this. As explained in Chapter 22, political or country
risk is best handled by adjusting expected cash flows, weighting them by
the probability of various scenarios. Foreign-currency risk and foreigninvestment risk are already captured in the spot and forward exchange
rates. As we will discuss in the following section, there is no need for an additional risk premium for currency risk.

INCORPORATING FOREIGN-CURRENCY RISK
IN VALUATIONS
Many executives are concerned about foreign-currency risk when it comes
to valuing foreign entities. Some even turn to hedging strategies with derivative instruments to try to manage their exposure to currency risk from
specific transactions or perhaps entire foreign business operations. To what
extent should executives be concerned about currency risk, and how important is it in valuing foreign entities?
3

R. Roll, “Industrial Structure and the Comparative Behavior of International Stock Market Indexes,” Journal of Finance, 47(1) (1992): 3 – 42.

INCORPORATING FOREIGN-CURRENCY RISK IN VALUATIONS

613

Exhibit 21.10 Share of Equity Returns Explained by Industry Composition
of Index
Adjusted R2, percent
Finland
Norway
United Kingdom
Italy
Denmark
Sweden
Belgium

19
33
41
43
46
50
53

Germany

60

Spain

60

Netherlands

61

France

61

Switzerland

62
Average 49%

Source: Roll, Journal of Finance, March 1992.

No Currency Risk Premium in Weighted Average Cost of Capital
We do not support the inclusion of an additional risk premium in the discount rate to cover for perceived currency risk. If there is a currency risk
premium, it is already included in the spot and forward exchange rates that
we use to translate currencies. To what extent financial markets actually
“price” currency risk in spot and forward exchange rates is still an open debate in academia.4 But these risk premiums—if any—are likely to be small.5
This should not come as a surprise. Basic finance theory tells us that there
is no value in a company managing currency risk for its shareholders if
the shareholders themselves can achieve this by simply diversifying their
4
See, for example, B. Solnik, International Investments, 4th ed. (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley,
1999), ch. 5.
5
P. Sercu and R. Uppal, International Financial Markets and the Firm, (Cincinnati, OH: SouthWestern, 1995), ch. 14.

614

CROSS-BORDER VALUATION

Exhibit 21.11 Comparing Stock Market Concentration
percent
Market size

Share of top 3 sectors
S&P 500

27

23

Japan

30

20

United Kingdom
> $1 trillion

41

43

France

33

47

Germany

30

46

Italy

> $0.5 trillion

Share of top 10 corporations

52

Australia

45

Netherlands

45

Spain
Korea

55
46
68
60

63

42

Sweden

50
55

61

Taiwan

72

Belgium

58

Singapore

55

> $200 billion

73
59

Finland
Malaysia

46

68
44

78
47

Denmark

66

Ireland

69

Greece

61

Portugal

63

74
82
70
81

Austria

55

70

Poland

58

69

Hungary

70

Czech Republic

72

93
86

Source: Thomson Financial Datastream, McKinsey analysis.

portfolio. There are indications that currency risk is indeed to a large extent
diversifiable; Exhibit 21.12 provides an example.
Keep in mind that nominal currency risk is irrelevant if exchange rates
immediately adjust to differences in inflation rates. The only relevant currency risk is real currency risk as measured by changes in relative purchas-

INCORPORATING FOREIGN-CURRENCY RISK IN VALUATIONS

615

Exhibit 21.12 Diversification of Real Currency Risk
Percent, exchange rates to U.S. dollar
10-year monthly real
exchange rate volatility
Argentina

28.4

Venezuela

15.9

Brazil

Equal weighted
Latin America
portfolio

8.2

12.7

Mexico
Chile

10-year monthly real exchange
rate volatility for portfolio

50% Latin America
and 50% UK
portfolio

10.8
4.4

Indonesia

17.5

Korea

14.3

Thailand

8.7

Philippines

6.6

Malaysia

6.2

Singapore

3.0

United Kingdom

3.4

4.5

Equal weighted
Asian portfolio
50% Asian and
50% UK portfolio

7.4

4.1

Source: International Monetary Fund.

ing power parity. Analysis of purchasing power parity indicates that currencies indeed revert to parity levels but not immediately. Short-term deviations from purchasing power parity levels can be significant, and have the
potential to leave corporations exposed to currency risk in real terms. However, shareholders are typically in a good position to diversify the real currency risk. Exhibit 21.12 shows the monthly volatility of real exchange rates
for a selection of Latin American and Asian currencies, as well as the
British pound. Although some of these currencies have a high volatility, a
regional portfolio already eliminates a lot of real currency risk, as shown by
its lower volatility. Combining a developing-markets portfolio with British
pounds diversifies the risk even further. If real currency risk is mostly diversifiable for shareholders, there should not be a currency risk premium of
any significance in the company’s cost of capital either.
However, suppose a company’s total exposure to currency risk is at such
a level that it could result in financial distress. In that case, currency risk
does become relevant for shareholder value creation because it could trigger
losses that shareholders cannot diversify away.

616

CROSS-BORDER VALUATION

Should Currency Risk Be Managed?
Whether for the right reasons or not, foreign-currency risk is an important
topic for many financial executives. Some companies experience significant
gains or losses as a result of currency fluctuations. The analyst community
and investors may be wary of the resulting earnings volatility, so currency
risk ends up on the management agenda. Heineken sells its Heinekenbrand beer in many countries across the world, including the United States
as its largest market, but brews the beer in the Netherlands. As a result, it
has a large currency exposure due to the mismatch between dollar-based
revenues and euro-based costs. When the U.S. dollar depreciated against
the euro in 2003 and 2004, Heineken faced considerable analyst concern
around its U.S. dollar exposure. Some analysts downgraded Heineken because of expected further weakening of the U.S. dollar and the impact that
would have on Heineken’s profitability.
But does this mean that currency risk should be managed? The overriding argument for risk management needs to be value creation, not elimination of currency risks that investors can diversify away. Risk management
can create value in four ways:
1. Reducing probability of business erosion and bankruptcy
2. Ensuring continuity of investment programs
3. Reducing expected tax payments
4. Improving transparency on actual business performance
We believe that most of the value creation potential lies in the first two
sources. We already discussed the importance of the risk of business erosion and bankruptcy in Chapter 17. Ensuring continuity of investment programs is especially important for companies with significant growth
opportunities that could be lost if critical investments are deferred or canceled in case of funding shortages due to currency losses.
The opportunity to reduce expected tax payments is probably limited.
For example, when a corporation incurs losses due to currency fluctuations,
in most countries it does not receive an immediate tax refund. Instead, it
may offset future taxable profits against the current loss via a so-called tax
loss carryforward. If risk management can smooth the corporation’s earnings over the years and prevent these from turning negative, the corporation
can avoid the loss of time value related to the tax loss carryforward. However, this applies mainly to companies whose earnings indeed turn negative
due to currency fluctuations, and it only reduces the time value lost.
The real benefits from improving transparency are difficult to assess. On
one hand, risk management can reduce currency-driven fluctuations in corporate results and thereby help to provide a better perspective on the com-

INCORPORATING FOREIGN-CURRENCY RISK IN VALUATIONS

617

pany’s true economic performance. On the other hand, such transparency
can also be achieved by internal and external reporting of results in constant
currency rates (as some international companies do) without incurring the
costs of risk management programs.

Economic versus Accounting Exposure
For currency risk management to create value, it needs to address the company’s economic exposure, not its accounting exposure. The impact of currency fluctuations on the balance sheet and income statement is not very
relevant in itself because these do not necessarily reflect a company’s true
economics. It is much more important to understand economic exposure,
that is, how currency risk affects a company’s current and future cash
flows, and whether this could lead to loss of investment opportunities,
business erosion, or even bankruptcy. Corporations with international operations typically face three sources of economic exposure to currency risk:
1. Competitive exposure from currency mismatches of revenue and cost
base. For example, a European company with a local cost base but
mainly sales in the United States would face competitive pressure if
the euro were to appreciate. It might not be able to increase the price
in U.S. dollars, so its margin would deteriorate.
2. Transaction exposure from time lags and fixed prices in contractual
arrangements and other business transactions. For example, if a company agrees to a purchase price for raw materials that is fixed in foreign currency, but settles the transaction a month later, it faces a loss
if the foreign currency appreciates.
3. Portfolio exposure from conversion of foreign subsidiary cash flows
into domestic-currency cash flows. Even if foreign operations are
sourcing locally and are funded locally, they can still lead to currency exposure for the parent, because the value of the net cash flows
as measured in the parent’s currency will fluctuate with the exchange rate.
Competitive exposure is what matters most for the continuity of investment programs and financial health of a company. A significant currency
mismatch between cash inflows and outflows can change the short-term
economics of the business and even lead a company into financial distress.
Given the size and uncertainty6 of this type of exposure, hedging with financial instruments does not offer a solution for the long term. The most
common strategy is to fix the underlying currency mismatch by shifting the
6

The size of the competitive exposure is difficult to predict because it depends on the level of
future business activity.

618

CROSS-BORDER VALUATION

cost base. This is what several Japanese and European automotive and
equipment manufacturers, including Toyota, BMW, and Daimler-Benz, did
in the 1980s when the yen and Deutsche mark appreciated strongly against
the U.S. dollar. As discussed earlier, Heineken has a significant competitive
exposure that leads to lower cash flows if the U.S. dollar depreciates. Such
exposure can only be hedged with financial instruments over the short
term and at considerable costs. Branding considerations probably make
Heineken unwilling to shift beer production to the United States. Although
it cannot reduce the risk, Heineken can absorb it because of its conservative
capital structure. The U.S. dollar is unlikely to lead to financial distress for
Heineken. Nevertheless, the competitive exposure means that Heineken’s
cash flow and share price will remain sensitive to fluctuations in the exchange rate of U.S. dollars to euros.
Transaction exposure is typically too small to be relevant as a potential
source of interruption of investment programs or business erosion, unless
there is exposure on, for example, major investment outlays or specific commitments. In most cases, transaction exposure can be hedged with financial
instruments or handled through contractual arrangements, if needed.
Portfolio exposure is also unlikely to lead to reduction of investments or
to business erosion. As long as a company’s debt is roughly in line with the
currencies in which it generates cash flows, portfolio exposure cannot turn
cash flows negative. In addition, different shareholders may have different
perspectives on portfolio exposure. For example, if a European company acquires a U.S. subsidiary, it increases its U.S. dollar portfolio exposure. For
its U.S. shareholders, this actually reduces their euro currency risk,
whereas its European shareholders incur additional dollar risk. Therefore,
this type of exposure typically does not call for hedging.
Ideally, you should analyze the impact of different exchange rate scenarios on the investment opportunities of the company and the company’s ability to service its debt payments. Note that cash flow volatility in itself is not
what counts; equally volatile cash flow patterns can have completely different risk management implications. Understand how cash flow volatility due
to currency risk could affect the company’s ability to fund future capital expenditures, pay taxes, service its interest payments, and return cash to
shareholders. If insufficient cash flow leads to deferral or cancellation of
capital expenditures, this could undermine the company’s growth and
competitive position. Inability to fulfill debt servicing on an ongoing basis
will obviously mean bankruptcy. In Exhibit 21.13, the first cash flow pattern (EBITDA Profile 1) does not necessarily require risk management, because it does not affect the company’s ongoing ability to fund growth and
return cash to its investors. The second cash flow pattern (EBITDA Profile
2), in contrast, does significantly affect the company’s investment program,
so it may benefit from an active risk management strategy. The appropriate
strategy to reduce the company’s currency risk depends on whether the

SUMMARY

619

Exhibit 21.13 Impact of Cash Flow Volatility

EBITDA profile 1

Cash flow

EBITDA profile 2

Capital expenditures
Working captal
Dividends
Taxes
Interest
Time

risk results from competitive, transaction, or portfolio exposure. As we have
argued, competitive exposure is usually the most important source of currency risk—and also the most difficult one to manage.

SUMMARY
A number of difficult issues arise in the valuation of foreign companies or
domestic companies with foreign operations. It is important to consider different accounting standards and tax systems, consistent assumptions underlying cash flow forecasts and discount rates, and the effect of currency
risk on value. Still, in the end, the way you apply the DCF valuation approach to foreign companies is the same as for domestic companies. You
need to understand and reflect local accounting and taxation in your analysis, but the adjustments are straightforward. The dominant positions of
IFRS and U.S. GAAP will strongly reduce issues related to international accounting differences. Cash flows for foreign business can be projected in
foreign or domestic currency as long as you consistently apply the spot-rate
or forward-rate method. The approach to estimating cost of capital also is
the same around the world, although estimation of some of the parameters

620

CROSS-BORDER VALUATION

(particularly market risk premium) can be controversial. Considering
today’s global integration of capital markets, we recommend using a common market risk premium around the world. Currency risk does not require a separate premium in the cost of capital. However, if currency risk
could lead to deferral of investments, business erosion, or even bankruptcy,
companies should consider managing the risk with financial instruments or
business measures (e.g., relocation of production).

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Do the differences between accounting practices affect the estimation of an entity’s value (for example, would either a change from
LIFO to FIFO or would the use of alternative depreciation techniques
for different asset classes affect enterprise value)? Explain.
2. Define interest rate parity. What is the significance of interest rate parity to an analyst forecasting a subsidiary’s value, when the subsidiary is located in a foreign country? Is the cost of risk-free
financing the same or different across country borders?
3. U.S. GAAP and IFRS accounting standards appear to be converging.
If this is the case, why does a manager need to understand the historical differences between these standards?
4. Define and give two examples of an intangible asset. Identify the accounting treatments for acquired versus internally generated intangible assets.
5. In a cross-border acquisition, an analyst must consider the impact of
taxes when estimating relevant cash flows. Identify four differences
an analysis must account for in the estimation of risk and cash flows.
6. Discuss the differences between the current, temporal, and inflationadjusted current methods to translate the financial statements of acquisitions or divisions located in moderately and hyperinflationary
economic environments.
7. What impact does the globalization of capital markets have on a
manager’s estimate of an appropriate cost of capital used to estimate
the value of a subsidiary headquartered in a foreign country?

22
Valuation in
Emerging Markets
The emerging economies in Asia and South America will experience
strong growth over the next decades; many analysts see China and India
moving into the ranks of the world’s largest economies.1 This sometimes
spectacular economic development will produce many situations requiring sound analysis and valuation. In the rising number of privatizations,
joint ventures, mergers and acquisitions, local financial parties such as
banks and capital markets will display growing sophistication. Institutional investors will also continue to diversify their portfolios, adding
international holdings in emerging-market stocks.
In this chapter we focus on issues that arise in financial analysis and
valuation of businesses in emerging markets. Valuation is much more difficult in these environments because of risks and obstacles to businesses, including great macroeconomic uncertainty, illiquid capital markets, controls
on the flow of capital into and out of the country, less-rigorous accounting
standards and disclosure levels, and high levels of political risk. Academics, investment bankers, and industry practitioners have yet to agree on
how to address these challenges. Methods vary considerably and practitioners often make arbitrary adjustments based on intuition and limited
empirical evidence.
With agreement lacking and emerging-market valuations so complex, we recommend a triangulation approach—comparing estimates of
the value from three methods. First, we use discounted cash flows with
Special thanks to our colleagues William Jones and Gustavo Wigman, who contributed to this
chapter.
1
See, for example, D. Wilson and R. Purushothaman, “Dreaming with BRICs: The Path to 2050”
(Global Economics paper no. 99, Goldman Sachs & Co., October 2003).

621

622

VALUATION IN EMERGING MARKETS

probability-weighted scenarios that explicitly model the risks the business
faces. Then we compare the value obtained from this approach with the results of two secondary approaches: a DCF approach with a country risk
premium built into the cost of capital, and a valuation based on comparable trading and transaction multiples.
The basics of estimating a DCF value are the same in emerging markets
as elsewhere. Therefore, we focus on complications specific to emergingmarket valuations:
• Handling foreign exchange rates, inflation, and interest rate gaps with
developed markets consistently when making financial projections
• Factoring inflation into historical financial analysis and cash flow
projections
• Incorporating special emerging-marketrisksconsistentlyin the valuation
• Estimating the cost of capital in emerging markets
• Using market-based references such as trading multiples and transaction multiples when interpreting and calibrating valuation results
We will apply our valuation approach in this chapter to ConsuCo, a leading
Brazilian manufacturer of consumer goods.2

EXCHANGE RATES, INFLATION, AND INTEREST RATE GAPS
Because exchange rates, inflation, and interest rates can fluctuate wildly
from year to year in emerging markets, assumptions underlying estimates
of future financial results in domestic or foreign currency and cost of capital must be consistent. In Chapter 21 we discussed how some fundamental
monetary assumptions should be defined consistently to avoid any biases in
the valuation results. This becomes even more important when you value
companies in emerging markets.
The components of the cash flows of emerging-market companies are
often denominated in several currencies. Consider an oil exporter. Its revenues are determined by the dollar price of oil, while many of its costs
(labor and domestic purchases) are determined by the domestic currency. If
foreign-exchange rates would perfectly reflect inflation differentials—so
that purchasing power parity would hold—the company’s operating margins and cash flows in real terms would be unaffected. In that case, changes
in exchange rates would be irrelevant for valuation purposes.
However, at least in the short run, this does not always hold, because in
emerging markets, exchange rates move far and fast. For example, in Argentina at the end of 2001, the exchange rate rose from 1.0 peso per U.S. dollar to nearly 1.9 pesos per U.S. dollar in 15 days, and to 3.1 in less than 4
2

This case illustration is a disguised example.

EXCHANGE RATES, INFLATION, AND INTEREST RATE GAPS

623

Exhibit 22.1 Brazilian PPP-Adjusted Dollar Exchange Rates
Reais per U.S. dollar index, 1964 = 100
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1964

1969

1974

1979

1984

1989

1994

1999

2004

Source: MCM Consultants, IMF International Financial Statistics.

months. During a period of just a couple of weeks in 1999, Brazil’s currency,
the Real, weakened by more than 50 percent relative to the U.S. dollar.
When estimating the impact of exchange rate movements on cash flow
forecasts, keep in mind that evidence shows that, over the long run, purchasing power parity does hold,3 even between emerging and developed
economies. In other words, exchange rates ultimately do adjust for differences in inflation between countries. For example, if you held $100 million of
Brazilian currency in 1964, by 2004 it would have been practically worthless
in U.S. dollars. Yet, if we adjust for purchasing power, the value of the currency didn’t change very much, as Exhibit 22.1 shows. In other words, suppose that, instead of holding $100 million of Brazilian currency, you held
$100 million of assets in Brazil whose value increased with inflation. In
2004, your assets would have been worth about $90 million (in real terms).
Therefore, when you perform valuations, your best assumption is that purchasing power parity holds in the long term; any other approach implies taking a bet on future real exchange rate movements.
Nevertheless, as Exhibit 22.1 also shows, exchange rates can deviate from
purchasing power parity (PPP) by as much as 20 percent to 30 percent
for several years (keeping in mind that PPP-adjusted exchange rates are
difficult to estimate). Therefore, before making financial projections, assess
whether the current exchange rate is over- or undervalued on a PPP basis
3
For a recent overview, see Alan M. Taylor and Mark Peter Taylor, “The Purchasing Power Parity Debate” (CEPR discussion paper no. 4495, 2004).

624

VALUATION IN EMERGING MARKETS

and, if so, by how much. Then model the convergence of currency rates to
purchasing power parity, and reflect its impact on the company’s profitability in your long-term financial projections. Because it is hard to predict how
long the current PPP deviation will persist, you could conduct a sensitivity
analysis to assess the valuation impact of the timing of the return to purchasing power parity. As you develop your forecasts, remember your overall
perspective about the economics of the business. The long-term sustainable
operating profit margin and ROIC should not be affected by any short-term
deviations from PPP. Relying on a set of fundamental monetary assumptions
keeps your projections consistent with your cost of capital whether you project in domestic, foreign, real, or nominal currency.
Regardless of any short- or long-term economic exposure to varying exchange rates, your valuation results should be independent of the currency
or mix of currencies in which you forecast the company’s cash flows. Use
actual or synthetic forward exchange rates to convert any future cash flow
into another currency. In many emerging economies, the forward-exchange
market is nonexistent or illiquid, so actual forward rates provide little guidance on likely future exchange rate movements or inflation differentials. In
that case, estimate a synthetic forward rate from your assumptions about
future inflation and interest rates for the currencies concerned (see Chapter
21 for details).

FACTORING INFLATION INTO HISTORICAL ANALYSIS
AND FORECASTS
Even with consistent assumptions about inflation, interest rates, and foreign exchange rates, sound analysis and forecasting of the financial performance of emerging-market companies remains challenging. Inflation
distorts the financial statements, so it is hard to make year-to-year historical comparisons, perform ratio analysis, or forecast performance.
For companies operating in high-inflation environments, historical
analysis and forecasting should be carried out in both nominal and real (constant currency) terms whenever possible. As we will explain, nominal indicators are sometimes not meaningful (e.g., for capital turnover), and in other
cases, real indicators are problematic (e.g., to determine corporate income
taxes). Proper valuation requires insights from both nominal- and real-terms
historical analyses. Financial projections can be made in real or nominal
terms or both; properly done projections should yield an identical value.

Historical Analysis
Accounting conventions in emerging markets often differ substantially
from those of developed markets, so a company’s economics may be diffi-

FACTORING INFLATION INTO HISTORICAL ANALYSIS AND FORECASTS

625

cult to understand. Furthermore, in many countries, complicated tax credits and adjustments make cash taxes harder to estimate than in developed
markets. For example, Brazil has made large and frequent changes to its tax
code. Brazil eliminated inflation accounting and reduced the corporate tax
rate to 30.5 percent in 1996, and in 1997 disallowed the deductibility of the
social contribution tax, effectively increasing the tax rate to 33 percent. To
make up for the loss of the tax shields that inflation accounting had generated, Brazil’s government allowed companies to deduct deemed interest on
equity net of a withholding tax of 15 percent.
Large accounting and tax differences are frequently eliminated when
the income statement and the balance sheet are brought together in the
cash flow calculation, following the guidelines set out in Chapter 7. Still,
before starting a valuation, you need to understand these differences. Unfortunately, the differences across emerging markets are too complex and
varied for a detailed discussion in this chapter. Instead, we highlight the
most common issues involving the impact of high inflation on your historical analysis.
In countries experiencing extreme inflation (more than 25 percent per
year), companies often report in year-end currency. In the income statement, items such as revenues and costs that were booked throughout the
year are restated at year-end purchasing power. Otherwise, the addition of
these items would not be meaningful. The balance sheet usually has adjustments to fixed assets, inventory, and equity; the accounts payable and receivable are already in year-end terms.
In most countries, however, financial statements are not adjusted to reflect the effects of inflation. If inflation is high, this leads to distortions in
the balance sheet and income statement. In the balance sheet, so-called
nonmonetary assets, such as inventories and property, plant, and equipment, are shown at values far below current replacement value if they are
long-lived assets. In the income statement, depreciation charges are too low
relative to current replacement costs. Sales and costs in December and January of the same year are typically added as if they represent the same purchasing power.
As a result, many financial indicators typically used in historical analyses can be distorted when calculated directly from the financial statements.
In emerging markets, companies often index their internal management
accounts to overcome these issues. If they do not, or if you are doing an
outside-in analysis, at least correct for the following distortions:

• Growth is overstated in times of inflation, so restate it in real terms by
deflating with an annual inflation index if sales are evenly spread
across the year. If sales are not spread evenly, use quarterly or monthly
inflation indexes to deflate the sales in each corresponding interval.

626

VALUATION IN EMERGING MARKETS

• Capital turnover is typically overstated because operating assets are
carried at historical costs. You can approximate the current costs of
long-lived assets by adjusting their reported value with an inflation
index for their estimated average lifetime. Or consider developing ratios of real sales relative to physical capacity indicators appropriate
for the sector—for example, sales per square meter in consumer retail. Inventory levels also need restating if turnover is low and inflation is very high.
• Operating margins (operating profit over sales) can be overstated
because of too-low depreciation and large holding gains on slowmoving inventories. Corrections for depreciation charges follow from
adjustments to property, plant, and equipment. You can estimate
cash operating expenses at current-cost basis by inflating the reported costs for the average time held in inventory. Alternatively, use
historical EBITDA-to-sales ratios to assess the company’s performance relative to peers; these ratios at least do not suffer from any
depreciation-induced bias.
• Use caution in interpreting credit ratios and other indicators of capital structure health. Distortions are especially significant in solvency
ratios such as debt to equity or total assets, because long-lived assets
are understated relative to replacement costs, and floating-rate debt
is at current currency units. As we advised in Chapter 17, use coverage ratios such as EBITDA to interest expense.4 These are less exposed to accounting distortions because depreciation has no impact
and debt financing in emerging markets is mostly at floating interest
rates or in foreign currency.

Financial Projections in Real and Nominal Terms
When you make financial projections of income statements and balance
sheets under high inflation for a valuation, keep in mind that accounting
adjustments cannot affect free cash flow. Thus, for valuation purposes, we
project financial statements without any accounting adjustments for inflation. The projections can be made in nominal or real terms. Exhibit 22.2
summarizes the major advantages and shortcomings of each approach.
Neither approach is perfect, so use elements of both to prepare consistent financial projections. Specifically, when projecting in real terms, it is
often difficult to calculate taxes correctly, as taxes are often calculated
based on nominal financial statements. Furthermore, you need to explicitly
project the cash flow effects of working capital changes because these do
not automatically follow from the annual change in working capital. The
4

Distortions occur in the ratio of EBITA to interest coverage if operating profit is overstated due
to low depreciation charges and low costs of procured materials.

FACTORING INFLATION INTO HISTORICAL ANALYSIS AND FORECASTS

627

Exhibit 22.2 Combining Real and Nominal Approaches to
Financial Modeling
Estimates

Modeling approach
Real

Operational performance
Sales
EBITDA
EBITA
Capital expenditures
Investments in working capital
Income taxes

Nominal

Preferred
application

–
–
¹
–

Financial statements

²

Continuing value

¹

1
If inflation impact on investments in working capital is explicitly included.
2

If inflation corrections are separately modeled and included in income statement and balance sheet.

main downside of using nominal cash flows is that future capital expenditures are difficult to project because the typically stable relationship between revenues and fixed assets does not hold under high inflation. As a
result, depreciation charges and EBITA also are difficult to project.

Five-Step Approach to Combined Nominal and Real-Terms
Financial Projections
We illustrate below how to combine both nominal and real forecasts in a
DCF valuation. In this example, the company’s revenues grow at 2 percent
in real terms, and the annual inflation rate is 20 percent in the first forecasted year and 10 percent thereafter (see Exhibit 22.3 on p. 628). To simplify, we assumed that all cash flows occur at the end of the year. Under
extreme inflation levels, this assumption could distort financial projections
because the cash flows that accumulate throughout the year are subject to
different inflation rates. In that case, split the year into quarterly or even
monthly intervals, project cash flows for each interval, and discount the
cash flows at the appropriate discount rate for that interval.
In practice, many more issues around financial projections arise in emerging-market valuations than in this simplified example. Nevertheless, it shows
how to address some key issues when developing a cash flow forecast under
high inflation, by means of the following step-by-step approach, leading to the
real and nominal valuation results shown in Exhibit 22.4 on page 629.

Step 1: Forecast operating performance in real terms To the extent possible, convert historical nominal balance sheets and income statements into

628

VALUATION IN EMERGING MARKETS

Exhibit 22.3 DCF under Inflation: Key Assumptions
Operations
Real growth rate (percent)
Real revenues
Real EBITDA
Net working capital/revenues (percent)
Real net PPE/real revenues (percent)
Lifetime of net PPE
Other
Inflation rate (percent)
Inflation index
Tax rate (percent)
Real WACC (percent)
Nominal WACC (percent)

Year 1
2
1,000
300
20
40
5

1.00
35

Forecasts
2
3
2
2
1,020 1,040
306
312
20
20
40
40

4
2
1,061
318
20
40

5
2
1,082
325
20
40

1,608
483
20
40

20
1.20
35
8.0
29.6

10
1.45
35
8.0
18.8

10
1.60
35
8.0
18.8

10
10.75
35
8.0
18.8

10
1.32
35
8.0
18.8

25

Note: Adjusted formula for real-terms continuing value.

real terms (usually at the current year’s currency value). At a minimum,
make a real-terms approximation of the historical development of the key
value drivers: growth and return on capital and the underlying capital
turnover and EBITA margin, so you can understand the true economics of
the business. With these approximations, forecast the operating performance of the business in real terms:
• Project future revenues and cash expenses to obtain EBITDA forecasts.5
• Estimate property, plant, and equipment (PPE) and capital expenditures from your assumptions on real-terms capital turnover.
• Working capital follows from projected revenues and assumptions on
days of working capital required.
• From projected net PPE and assumptions on the lifetime of the assets, derive the annual depreciation to estimate real-terms EBITA.

Step 2: Build financial statements in nominal terms Nominal projections
can be readily derived by converting the real operating projections into
nominal terms (note that these projections do not include any monetary adjustments as under, for example, inflation accounting):
• Project nominal revenues, cash expenses, EBITDA, and capital expenditures by multiplying their real-terms equivalents by the inflation index for the year.
5

This step assumes that all expenses included in EBITDA are cash costs.

629

Adjusted formula for real-terms continuing value.

1

DCF valuation
Free cash flow
Continuing value (value driver formula)1
Continuing value (cash flow perpetuity formula)
Present value factor
DCF value
1,795

400
(80)
80
400
200
600

Invested capital
Net PPE (beginning of year)
Depreciation
Capital expenditures
Net PPE (end of year)
Net working capital
Invested capital

Ratios (percent)
Net PPE/revenues
Net working capital/revenues
ROIC
Free cash flow growth rate

143
80
(80)

113

0.86

0.93

40
20
24
17

408
(82)
90
416
208
624

144
82
(90)
(23)
113

97

40
20
24

400
(80)
88
408
204
612

142
80
(88)
(37)
97

0.79

114

40
20
23
1

416
(83)
92
424
212
637

146
83
(92)
(23)
114

0.74

116

40
20
23
1

424
(85)
93
433
216
649

148
85
(93)
(24)
116

Real projections
Year 1
2
3
4
5
1,000 1,020 1,040 1,061 1,082
300
306
312
318
325
(80)
(80)
(82)
(83)
(85)
220
226
231
235
240
(77)
(84)
(87)
(89)
(92)
143
142
144
146
148

Free cash flow
NOPLAT
Depreciation
Capital expenditures
Investment in net working capital
Free cash flow

NOPLAT
Revenues
EBITDA
Depreciation
EBITA
Taxes
NOPLAT

Exhibit 22.4 DCF under Inflation: Real and Nominal Models

170
2,891
2,891
0.16

40
20
23
2

631
(126)
139
643
322
965

218
126
(139)
(35)
170

25
1,608
483
(126)
356
(139)
218

1,795

400
(80)
80
400
200
600

143
80
(80)

0.77

116

35
20
31

400
(80)
106
426
245
670

187
80
(106)
(45)
116

0.65

149

33
20
32
28

426
(85)
118
459
275
734

212
85
(118)
(30)
149

0.55

166

32
20
33
11

459
(92)
133
500
308
808

241
92
(133)
(34)
166

0.46

185

32
20
34
12

500
(100)
149
549
346
895

272
100
(149)
(38)
185

Nominal projections
Year 1
2
3
4
5
1,000 1,224 1,373 1,541 1,729
300
367
412
462
519
(80)
(80)
(85)
(92) (100)
220
287
327
370
419
(77) (101) (114) (130) (147)
143
187
212
241
272

1,827
31,063
31,064
0.01

30
20
36
12

4,631
(926)
1,491
5,196
3,457
8,653

2,768
926
(1,491)
(376)
1,827

25
17,283
5,185
(926)
4,259
(1,491)
2,768

630

VALUATION IN EMERGING MARKETS

• Estimate net property, plant, and equipment on a year-by-year basis
from the prior-year balance plus nominal capital expenditures minus
nominal depreciation (which is estimated as a percentage of net PPE
according to the estimated lifetime).
• Working capital follows from revenues and days of working capital required.
• Subtract the depreciation charges from EBITDA to obtain nominal EBITA.
• Calculate income taxes on nominal EBITA without inflation corrections. (Always check the local tax rules for the reasonableness of this
assumption.)
In contrast to the real-terms projections, the capital turnover is now increasing over time because nominal net PPE grows slower than revenues in
a high-inflation environment. In this example, we did not build a complete
balance sheet and income statement. That would require the following additional steps:
• Forecast interest expense and other nonoperating income statement
items in nominal terms ( based on the prior year’s balance sheet).
• Equity should equal last year’s equity plus earnings, less dividends,
plus or minus any share issues or repurchases.
• Finally, balance the balance sheet with debt or marketable securities.6

Step 3: Build financial statements in real terms Most of the operating
items for the real-terms income statement and balance sheet were already
estimated in step 1. Now also include the real-terms taxes on EBITA by deflating the nominal taxes as estimated in step 2. For full financial statements, use the inflation index to convert debt, marketable securities,
interest expense, income taxes, and nonoperating terms from the nominal
statements into real terms. The real-terms equity account is a plug to balance the balance sheet. To make sure you have done this correctly, be sure
the real equity account equals last year’s equity plus earnings, less dividends, plus or minus share issues or repurchases, and plus or minus inflationary gains or losses on the monetary assets (such as cash, receivables,
payables, and debt).
Step 4: Forecast the future free cash flows in real and nominal terms from
the projected income statements and balance sheets Follow the general
approach described in Chapter 7. The only difference is that the real-terms
6
As noted, these projections are made for valuation purposes and not necessarily in accordance with local or international accounting standards prescribing any inf lation or monetary
corrections for particular groups of assets and liabilities. Free cash f lows are not affected by
such adjust ments.

FACTORING INFLATION INTO HISTORICAL ANALYSIS AND FORECASTS

631

investment in net working capital (NWCR) is equal to the increase in working capital plus a monetary loss due to inflation:7
IX t−1 

Investment in NWCt = Increase in NWCtR + NWCtR−1 1 −

IX t 


where IXt is the inflation index for the year t.
To check for consistency, use the inflation index to convert the free cash
flows from the nominal projections to real terms. These should equal the
free cash flows from the real-terms projections in each year.

Step 5: Estimate DCF value in real and nominal terms When discounting
real and nominal cash flows under high inflation, you must address three
key issues:
1. Ensure that the WACC estimates in real terms (WACCR) and nominal
terms (WACCN) are defined consistently with the inflation assumptions in each year:

(1 + WACC ) = (1 + WACC ) × (1 + Inflation )
N
t

R
t

t

Later in this chapter, we will discuss how to estimate WACC for companies in emerging markets.
2. The value-driver formula as presented in Chapter 9 should be adjusted when estimating continuing value in real terms. The returns
on capital in real-terms projections overestimate the economic returns in the case of positive net working capital. The free cash flow
in real terms differs from the cash flow implied by the value driver
formula by an amount equal to the annual monetary loss on net
working capital:
g Rt 
IX t−1 


FCF Rt =  1 −
× NOPLAT Rt − NWCRt−1  1 −
R 
IX t 


ROIC t 

The real-terms value driver formula is adjusted for this monetary
loss, reflecting the perpetuity assumptions for inflation (i) and the
ratio of net working capital to invested capital (NWCR/ICR):
7

Even for assets held at constant levels in real-terms balance sheets, replacement invest ments
are required at increasing prices in an inf lationary environment. These replacement investments represent a cash outf low, also in real terms, but do not show up from real-terms balance
sheet differences from year to year. In contrast, the nominal invest ment cash f low does follow
from the nominal balance sheet differences from year to year.

632

VALUATION IN EMERGING MARKETS

CV R =

GR 

1
−
NOPLAT R

ROICR 
WACCR − g R

where
 NWCR  i  
GR = g R − 
×
R
 1 + i  
 IC

The resulting continuing-value estimate is the same as that obtained
from a free cash flow perpetuity formula. After indexing for inflation, it also equals the continuing-value estimates derived from nominal projections.
3. When using the continuing-value formulas, make sure the explicit
forecast period is long enough for the model to reach a steady state
with constant growth rates of free cash flow. Because of the way inflation affects capital expenditures and depreciation, you need a
much longer horizon than for valuations with no or low inflation.

ConsuCo Case Example: Inflation Adjustments
Let’s explore how to handle inflation and accounting issues in the financial
analysis and valuation of ConsuCo.

Historical analysis In analyzing ConsuCo’s historical financial statements,
we made adjustments in two areas. First, following the approach in Chapter
7, we rearranged the balance sheet and the income statements to get the
statements for NOPLAT, invested capital, and free cash flow. Chapter 7 discusses adjustments needed for financial statements according to U.S. GAAP
or IFRS, but the ConsuCo statements follow Brazilian GAAP, so we had to
make some additional adjustments. Most of these were relatively minor. The
largest involved the consolidation of a securitization vehicle, for which only
the net asset position is shown under Brazilian GAAP.
Second, we estimated some key financial ratios on an approximate realterms basis. Although annual inflation in Brazil has been moderate since
1997 at levels between 5 and 10 percent, ratios such as operating margin and
capital turnover are likely to be biased when directly calculated from the financial statements. Therefore, we looked at trends in cash operating margins (EBITDA over sales). In addition, we estimated the sales revenues in
real terms per unit of production capacity over time to better understand
the development of real-terms capital turnover.

FACTORING INFLATION INTO HISTORICAL ANALYSIS AND FORECASTS

633

Exhibit 22.5 ConsuCo: Key Historical Financial Indicators
percent
Nominal indicators
Sales growth
Adjusted EBITA/sales
NOPLAT/sales
Invested capital (excluding goodwill)/sales
Invested capital (including goodwill)/sales
ROIC (excluding goodwill)
ROIC (including goodwill)
Approximate real indicators
Sales growth (inflation-adjusted)
EBITDA/sales
Sales/capacity1
1

1998
41
3.5
2.9
35.2
42.3
8.3
6.9

1999
32
4.6
3.3
34.8
40.3
9.5
8.2

2000
31
5.7
4.8
57.0
61.9
8.4
7.7

2001
6
5.3
4.5
64.9
74.7
6.9
6.0

2002
17
5.3
3.9
62.4
71.7
6.2
5.4

2003
14
6.9
5.3
64.5
72.9
8.2
7.3

32
5.7
8.7

24
6.7
7.9

23
7.2
7.0

(2)
7.6
6.4

9
7.5
6.3

5
9.2
6.2

In inflation-adjusted Reais million per capacity unit.

The results are reflected in Exhibit 22.5. Between 1998 and 2003, ConsuCo’s sales grew significantly in real terms at around 15 percent per year,
largely driven by acquisitions. But growth has slowed considerably since
2000. Cash operating margins improved significantly, from 5.7 percent in
1998 to 9.2 percent in 2003. In real terms, annual sales per unit of production
capacity have been fairly stable since 2000 at around 6.0 to 6.5 million Reais,
as have nominal turnover levels for invested capital (excluding goodwill).

Financial projections Based on the findings from the historical analysis and
analyst consensus forecasts as of July 2004, we made the operating and financial forecasts summarized in Exhibit 22.6 on page 634 in real and nominal
terms. We assumed that no major economic crisis will materialize in Brazil.
ConsuCo is investing heavily for future growth. Real-terms sales growth
is projected to peak at 8 percent in 2005 and then gradually decline over the
next four years to around 3 percent, close to Brazil’s long-term expected real
GDP growth. Cash margins will continue to rise to 9.7 percent in 2005 and
stay at that level in perpetuity. Tougher competition will create downward
pressure on margins, but the company’s improvements in selling, general
and administrative expenses compensate for this.
Capacity requirements are derived from sales forecasts in real terms, assuming sales productivity of 6.2 millon Reais per unit of capacity. Capital
expenditures for maintenance are estimated in real terms as a percentage of
projected total capacity and expenditures for capacity expansion are projected at around 2.3 million Reais per unit. The future development of net
PPE in real terms is derived from the capital expenditure projections.
The resulting ROIC (excluding goodwill) in real terms for ConsuCo decreases from its current value of around 7.6 percent to around 6.6 percent in

634

VALUATION IN EMERGING MARKETS

Exhibit 22.6 ConsuCo: Summary Financial Projections, Base Case
Reais million, percent

Operating projections
Sales growth (real, percent)
EBITDA/sales (percent)
EBITDA (real terms, percent)
Sales/capacity1
Capacity units
Capital expenditures (expansion)2
Capital expenditures (maintenance)2
Real projections
Sales
Adjusted EBITA/sales (percent)
NOPLAT/sales (percent)
Invested capital (excluding goodwill)/
sales (percent)
ROIC (excluding goodwill, percent)
Nominal projections
Sales
Adjusted EBITA/sales (percent)
NOPLAT/sales (percent)
Invested capital (excluding goodwill)/
sales (percent)
ROIC (excluding goodwill, percent)

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2014

2019

7.0
9.5
2,201
6.2
3,757
558
663

8.0
9.7
2,427
6.2
4,058
682
709

7.0
9.7
2,597
6.2
4,342
645
766

6.0
9.7
2,753
6.2
4,602
591
819

5.0
9.7
2,890
6.2
4,832
522
869

3.0
9.7
2,977
6.2
4,977
329
912

3.0
9.7
3,451
6.2
5,770
382
1,057

3.0
9.7
4,001
6.2
6,689
442
1,226

23,126 24,976 26,724 28,327 29,744 30,636
7.2
7.4
7.5
7.5
7.6
7.6
4.8
4.8
4.7
4.6
4.5
4.4
70.2
69.3
68.6
68.0
67.6
67.2

35,516
7.7
4.2
65.9

41,172
7.8
4.1
65.0

7.0

6.7

6.6

24,778 28,258 31,721 35,164 38,558 41,474
6.9
7.0
7.0
7.0
6.9
6.9
5.0
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.2
5.1
60.0
58.3
57.2
56.3
55.5
54.7

59,717
6.8
5.1
52.2

85,984
6.8
5.1
51.0

9.8

10.1

7.6

8.4

7.6

8.9

7.4

9.0

7.3

9.2

7.2

9.3

9.3

1
In inflation-adjusted Reais million per capacity unit.
2

In inflation-adjusted Reais million.

the continuing value period. In contrast, the ROIC in nominal terms increases from 8.4 to around 10.1 percent because of the inflation impact on
capital turnover.

INCORPORATING EMERGING-MARKET RISKS IN THE VALUATION
The major distinction between valuing companies in developed markets
and emerging markets is the increased level of risk. Not only must you account for risks related to the company’s strategy, market position, and industry dynamics, as you would in a developed market, you must also deal
with the risks caused by greater volatility in the capital markets and in the
macroeconomic and political environments.
There is no consensus on how to reflect this higher level of risk in a DCF
valuation. The most common approach is to add a country risk premium to
the discount rate. The alternative is to model risks explicitly in the cash flow
projections in what we call the scenario DCF approach. Both methodologies, if
correctly and consistently applied, lead to the same result. We show this in

INCORPORATING EMERGING-MARKET RISKS IN THE VALUATION

635

the following example of an investment in two identical production plants,
one in Europe and the other in an emerging economy (see Exhibit 22.7 on p.
636). However, the scenario DCF approach is analytically more robust and
better shows the impact of emerging-market risks on value.

Scenario DCF Approach
The scenario DCF approach simulates alternative trajectories for future
cash flows. At a minimum, model two scenarios: One should assume that
cash flow develops according to conditions reflecting business as usual (i.e.,
without major economic distress). The second should reflect cash flows assuming that any emerging-market risks materialize.
In the example, the cash flows for the European plant grow steadily at
3 percent per year into perpetuity. For the plant in the emerging market, the
cash flow growth is the same under a business-as-usual scenario, but there
is a 25 percent probability of economic distress resulting in a cash flow that
is 55 percent lower into perpetuity. The emerging-market risk is taken into
account, not in the cost of capital, but in the lower expected value of future
cash flows from weighting both scenarios at the assumed probabilities. The
resulting value of the emerging-market plant (€1,917) is clearly below the
value of its European sister plant (€2,222), using a WACC of 7.5 percent.
We assumed for simplicity that if adverse economic conditions develop
in the emerging market, they will do so in the first year of the plant’s operation. In reality, of course, the investment will face a probability of domestic
economic distress in each year of its lifetime. Modeling risk over time would
require more complex calculations yet would not change the basic results.
We also assumed that in a local crisis, the emerging-market business would
face significantly lower cash flows but not wind up entirely worthless.

Country Risk Premium DCF Approach
The second approach is to add a country risk premium to the cost of capital
for comparable investments in developed markets. We then apply the resulting discount rate to the cash flow projections following a business-as-usual
scenario. The key drawback is that there is no objective way to establish the
country risk premium. For our two-plant example, we can derive in hindsight what the premium should be to obtain the same result as under
the scenario DCF approach. For us to arrive at a value of €1,917 for the
emerging-market plant, the discount rate for the business-as-usual projections would have to be 8.2 percent, which translates to a country risk premium of 0.7 percent.
On occasion, practitioners make the mistake of adding the country risk
premium to the cost of capital to discount the expected value of future cash

636
100

Cost of capital
Net present value

Cash flows in perpetuity1
Year 1
“As usual”
100

Cost of capital
Net present value

Expected cash flows

2,222

2
103

2,222

103

7.5%

3
106

7.5%

106

3
106

Assuming perpetuity cash flow growth of 3% and recovery under distress of 45% of cash flows “as usual.”

1
Assuming perpetuity cash flow growth of 3%.
2

Country risk
premium
approach

Scenario
approach

Net present value for identical facilities in …
… a European market
Probability
Cash flows in perpetuity1
Year 1
2
100%
“As usual”
100
103
0%
“Distressed”

4…
109

109

4…
109

Exhibit 22.7 Scenario DCF versus Country Risk Premium DCF

86

1,917

89

Cost of capital
Country risk premium
Adjusted cost of capital
Net present value

1,917

Cash flows in perpetuity2
Year 1
2
“As usual”
100
103

Cost of capital
Net present value

Expected cash flows

… an emerging market
Probability
Cash flows in perpetuity2
Year 1
2
75%
“As usual”
100
103
“Distressed”
45
25%
46

7.5%
0.7%
8.2%

3
106

7.5%

92

3
106
48

86% of European NPV

4…
109

86% of European NPV

94

4…
109
49

INCORPORATING EMERGING-MARKET RISKS IN THE VALUATION

637

flows rather than to the “promised” cash flows of a business-as-usual scenario. The resulting value is too low because the probability of a crisis is accounted for twice.8

Scenario DCF as Prime Valuation Approach
Some surveys show that managers generally adjust for emerging-market
risks by adding a risk premium to the discount rate.9 Nonetheless, we recommend the scenario DCF approach. It provides a more solid analytical
foundation and a more robust understanding of the value than incorporating country risks in the discount rate.
One reason is that most country risks, including expropriation, devaluation, and war, are largely diversifiable (though not entirely, as the economic
crisis in 1998 demonstrated). Consider the international consumer goods
player illustrated in Exhibit 22.8 on page 638. Its returns on capital were
highly volatile for individual emerging markets, but taken together, these
markets were hardly more volatile than developed markets; the corporate
portfolio diversified away most of the risks. Finance theory clearly indicates that the cost of capital should not reflect risk that can be diversified.
This does not mean that diversifiable risk is irrelevant for a valuation: the
possibility of adverse future events will affect the level of expected cash
flows, as in the example in Exhibit 22.7. But once this has been incorporated
in the forecast for cash flows, there is no need for an additional markup of
the cost of capital if the risk is diversifiable.
Another argument against a country risk premium is that many country
risks apply unequally to companies in a given country. For example, banks
are more likely to be affected than retailers. Some companies (raw-materials
exporters) might benefit from a currency devaluation, while others (rawmaterials importers) will be damaged. For the consumer goods company in
Exhibit 22.8, economic crises had only a short-term impact on sales and
profit as measured in stable currency. In most cases, after a year or two,
sales and profits roughly regained their original growth trajectories. Applying the same risk premium to all companies in an emerging market
could overstate the risk for some businesses and understate it for others.
Furthermore, there is no systematic method to calculate a country risk
premium. In our example, we could reengineer this premium because the
true value of the plant was already known from the scenario approach. In
practice, the country risk premium is sometimes set at the spread of the
8
This is analogous to the error made by discounting the expected coupon and principal payments on a corporate bond at the promised yield (i.e., the yield to maturity) instead of the expected yield (i.e., the cost of debt).
9
T. Keck, E. Levengood, and A. Longfield, “Using Discounted Cash Flow Analysis in an International Setting: A Survey of Issues in Modeling the Cost of Capital,” Journal of Applied Corporate
Finance, 11(3) (1998).

638

VALUATION IN EMERGING MARKETS

Exhibit 22.8 Returns on Diverse Emerging Market Portfolio
Select individual emerging market returns on capital1

Combined portfolio returns on capital2

600

600
Country A
Country B
Country C
Country D
Country E

500

400
Index ROIC

Index ROIC

400

500

300

300

200

200

100

100

0

0

–100
1981

1985

1989

1993

1997

2001

Emerging markets

–100
1981

Developing markets

1985

1989

1993

1997

2001

1
In stable currency and adjusted for local accounting differences.
2

Combined portfolio included additional countries not reflected here.
Source: Company information.

local government debt rate10 denominated in U.S. dollars and a U.S. government bond of similar maturity. However, that is reasonable only if the returns on local government debt are highly correlated with returns on
corporate investments.
Finally, when managers have to discuss emerging-market risks and
their effect on cash flow in scenarios, they gain more insights than they
would get from a “black box” addition to the discount rate. By identifying
specific factors with a large impact on value, managers can plan to mitigate
these risks. Furthermore, managers easily underestimate the impact of
even a small country risk premium in the discount rate: In the example of
Exhibit 22.8, setting a country risk premium to 3 percent would be equivalent to assuming a 70 percent probability of economic distress.

Constructing Cash Flow Scenarios and Probabilities
To use the scenario DCF approach, construct at least two scenarios. The base
case, or business-as-usual scenario, describes how the business will per10
This is also a promised yield rather than an expected yield on government bonds, further underlining the point that the cost of capital based on country risk premium should not be applied
to expected cash f lows, but to “promised” cash f lows (those following a business-as-usual scenario in which no country risk materializes).

INCORPORATING EMERGING-MARKET RISKS IN THE VALUATION

639

form if no major crises occur. The downside scenario describes the financial
results if a major crisis does occur.
For both scenarios, start by projecting the macroeconomic environment
because this influences industry and company performance. The major
macroeconomic variables to forecast are GDP growth, inflation rates,
foreign-exchange rates, and interest rates. These items must be linked in a
way that reflects economic realities and should be included in the basic set
of monetary assumptions underlying your valuation. For instance, when
constructing a downside scenario with high inflation, make sure that the
same inflation rates underlie the financial projections and cost of capital estimates for the company to be valued. Foreign-exchange rates should also
reflect this inflation in the long run because of purchasing power parity.
Given the assumptions for macroeconomic performance, construct the industry scenarios basically in the same way as in developed markets. The
major difference is in the greater uncertainty involved in modeling outcomes
under severe crises for which there may be no precedent.
While estimating probabilities for the cash flow scenarios is ultimately
a matter of management judgment, there are indicators of reasonable probabilities. Historical data on previous crises can give some indication of frequency and severity of country risk and the time required for recovery.
Analyzing the changes in GDP of 20 emerging economies over the past 20
years, we found that these economies had experienced economic distress
about once every five years (a real-terms GDP decline of more than 5 percent). This would suggest a 20 percent probability for a downside scenario.
Another source of information for estimating probabilities is prospective data from current government bond prices.11 Recent academic research
suggests that government default probabilities five years into the future
in emerging markets such as Argentina, were around 30 percent in nondistress years.12

ConsuCo Case Example: Cash Flow Scenarios and Probabilities
Returning to the ConsuCo example, we already constructed a business-asusual scenario in the previous section. For a downward scenario, we analyzed ConsuCo’s performance under more adverse economic conditions in
the past. Brazil has experienced several severe economic and monetary
downturns, including an inflation rate that surpassed 2,000 percent in 1993.
Judging by its key financial indicators, such as EBITDA to sales and realterms sales growth, the impact on ConsuCo’s business performance was
11

See, for example, D. Duffie and K. Singleton, “Modeling Term Structures of Defaultable
Bonds,” Review of Financial Studies 12 (1999): 687–720; and R. Merton, “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest Rates,” Journal of Finance, 29(2) (1974): 449– 470.
12
See J. Merrick, “Crisis Dynamics of Implied Default Recovery Ratios: Evidence from Russia
and Argentina,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 25(10) (2001): 1921–1939.

640

VALUATION IN EMERGING MARKETS

Exhibit 22.9 ConsuCo: ROIC in Downside Scenario versus Base Case
20

15

ROIC (excluding goodwill)

10

5

0

–5

–10

–15

Base case-nominal
Base case-real
Downside nominal
Downside real

–20 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

significant. ConsuCo’s cash operating margin was negative for four years, at
around −10 to −5 percent, and then recovered to its normal levels. In the
same period, sales in real terms declined by 10 to 15 percent per year but
grew sharply after the crisis. For the downside scenario projections, we assumed similar negative cash margins and real-terms sales decline for up to
five years, followed by a gradual return to the long-term margins and
growth assumed under the business-as-usual scenario. Exhibit 22.9 compares the nominal and real returns on invested capital under both scenarios: In the downside scenario, the returns plummet and then increase as the
recovery starts. After 2010, the nominal returns even surpass those in the
base case as the extreme inflation levels push up the capital turnovers. Of
course, the nominal returns are artificially high, as a comparison with the
real returns shows. The DCF value under the downside scenario will turn
out to be only half of the base-case value. We estimated the probability of
this downside scenario at 25 to 35 percent.

ESTIMATING COST OF CAPITAL IN EMERGING MARKETS
Calculating the cost of capital in any country can be challenging, but
for emerging markets, the challenge is an order of magnitude higher. In
this section, we provide our fundamental assumptions, background on

ESTIMATING COST OF CAPITAL IN EMERGING MARKETS

641

the important issues, and a practical way to estimate the components of
the cost of capital.

Fundamental Assumptions
Our analysis adopts the perspective of a global investor—either a multinational company or an international investor with a diversified portfolio.
Of course, many emerging markets are not well integrated with the global
market, and local investors may face barriers to investing outside their
home market. As a result, local investors cannot always hold well-diversified
portfolios, and their cost of capital may be considerably different from that
of a global investor. Unfortunately, there is no established framework for estimating the capital cost for local investors. Furthermore, as long as international investors have access to local investment opportunities, local
prices will be based on an international cost of capital. Finally, according to
empirical research, emerging markets have become increasingly integrated
into global capital markets.13 We believe that this trend will continue and
that most countries will gradually reduce foreign-investment restrictions
for local investors in the long run.
Another assumption is that most country risks are diversifiable from
the perspective of the global investor. We therefore need no additional risk
premiums in the cost of capital for the risks encountered in emerging markets when discounting expected cash flows. Of course, if you choose to discount the cash flow from the business-as-usual scenario only, you should
add a country risk premium.
Given these assumptions, the cost of capital in emerging markets
should generally be close to a global cost of capital adjusted for local inflation and capital structure. It is also useful to keep some general guidelines
in mind:
• Use the CAPM to estimate the cost of equity in emerging markets. The
CAPM may be a less robust model for the less-integrated emerging
markets, but there is no better alternative model today. Furthermore,
we believe it will become a better predictor of equity returns worldwide as markets continue to become more integrated.
• There is no one “right ” answer, so be pragmatic. In emerging markets,
there are often significant information and data gaps (e.g., for estimating betas or the risk-free rate in local currency). Be flexible as you
assemble the available information piece by piece to build the cost of
capital, and triangulate your results with country risk premium approaches and multiples.
13

See, for example, C. Harvey, “The Drivers of Expected Returns in International Markets,”
Emerging Markets Quarterly (Fall 2000): 1–17.

642

VALUATION IN EMERGING MARKETS

• Be sure monetary assumptions are consistent. Ground your model in a
common set of monetary assumptions to ensure that the cash flow
forecasts and discount rate are consistent. If you are using local nominal cash flows, the cost of capital must reflect the local inflation rate
that is embedded in the cash flows. For real-terms cash flows, subtract inflation from the nominal cost of capital.
• Allow for changes in cost of capital. The cost of capital in an emergingmarket valuation may change, based on evolving inflation expectations, changes in a company’s capital structure and cost of debt, or
foreseeable reforms in the tax system. For example, for valuations in
Argentina during the economic and monetary crisis of 2002, the shortterm inflation rate of 30 percent could not be considered a reasonable
basis for a long-term cost of capital estimate because such a crisis
could not be expected to last forever.14 In such cases, estimate the cost
of capital on a year-by-year basis, following the underlying set of basic
monetary assumptions.
• Don’t mix approaches. Use the cost of capital to discount the cash flows
in a probability-weighted scenario approach. Do not add any risk premium, because you would be double-counting risk. If you are discounting only future cash flows in a business-as-usual scenario, add a
risk premium to the discount rate.

Estimating the Cost of Equity
To estimate the components of the cost of equity, use the standard CAPM
model described in Chapter 10.

Risk-free rate In emerging markets, the risk-free rate is harder to estimate from government bonds than in developed markets. Three main
problems arise. First, most of the government debt in emerging markets is
not, in fact, risk free: The ratings on much of this debt are often well below
investment grade. Second, it is difficult to find long-term government
bonds that are actively traded with sufficient liquidity. Finally, the longterm debt that is traded is often in U.S. dollars, a European currency, or
the Japanese yen, so it is not appropriate for discounting local nominal
cash flows.
Our recommendation is to follow a very straightforward approach. Start
with a risk-free rate based on the 10-year U.S. government bond yield, as in
developed markets. Add to this the projected difference over time between
U.S. and local inflation to develop a nominal risk-free rate in local cur-

14

Annual consumer price inf lation came down to around 5 percent in Argentina in 2004.

ESTIMATING COST OF CAPITAL IN EMERGING MARKETS

643

Exhibit 22.10 ConsuCo: Estimating Beta
Peers
ConsuCo
PeerCo 1
PeerCo 2
PeerCo 3
PeerCo 4
PeerCo 5
PeerCo 6
PeerCo 7
PeerCo 8
PeerCo 9
PeerCo 10
PeerCo 11
Average
Median

Unlevered betas
Barra
Bloomberg1
0.733
1.343
0.664
0.712
0.589
0.407
0.795
0.693
0.492
0.236
0.475
0.749
0.480
0.231
0.294
0.198
0.278
0.361
0.418
0.384
0.820
0.635
0.649
0.688
0.557
0.553
0.541
0.521

Adjusted2
0.748
0.782
0.846
1.232
0.346
0.439
0.381
0.271
0.386
0.641
0.803
0.625
0.625
0.633

Average
1.038
0.688
0.498
0.744
0.364
0.612
0.356
0.246
0.319
0.401
0.728
0.669
0.555
0.531

1
Against FT World Index on a weekly basis over past 2 years.
2

Adjusted for the high-tech boom (see chapter 10).
Source: Bloomberg, Barra, Datastream, McKinsey analysis.

rency.15 Sometimes you can derive this inflation differential from the
spread between local government bond yields denominated in local currency versus U.S. dollars.16

Beta Sometimes practitioners calculate beta relative to the local market
index. This is not only inconsistent from the perspective of a global investor,
but also potentially distorted by the fact that the index in an emerging market will rarely be representative of a diversified economy. Instead, estimate
industry betas relative to a well-diversified or global market index as recommended in Chapter 10. Since equity markets in emerging economies are
often small, with liquidity concentrated in a few stocks, it may be hard to
find a representative sample of publicly traded local companies to estimate
an industry beta. In that case, derive an industry beta from international
comparables that operate in the same or a similar sector. The implicit assumption is that the fundamental drivers of systematic risk will be similar
in emerging and developed markets.
For ConsuCo, we used three sources for estimates of beta in an international peer group: Bloomberg betas calculated against the FT World
Index, Barra betas, and betas adjusted for the high-tech boom (see Chapter
10 for more details). Note that the unlevered beta estimates are similar for
industry peers, with some exceptions, as shown in Exhibit 22.10. Overall,
15
In this way, we do not model the U.S. term structure of interest rates. Technically, this should
be included as well, but it will not make a large difference in the valuation.
16
Technically, this is correct only if the emerging-market bonds are relatively low risk, as for example for Chile and South Korea.

644

VALUATION IN EMERGING MARKETS

Exhibit 22.11 ConsuCo: Estimating the Nominal Cost of Equity
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2014

2019

United States
Inflation (percent)
Risk-free interest rate (percent)

2.0
4.6

2.0
4.6

2.0
4.6

2.0
4.6

2.0
4.6

2.0
4.6

2.0
4.6

2.0
4.6

Brazil
Inflation (IPCA, percent)
Risk-free interest rate (percent)1

7.1
9.8

5.6
8.2

4.9
7.5

4.6
7.2

4.4
7.0

4.4
7.0

4.4
7.0

4.4
7.0

Relevered beta
Market risk premium (percent)
Cost of equity (percent)

0.8
5.0
14.0

0.8
5.0
12.4

0.8
5.0
11.7

0.8
5.0
11.3

0.8
5.0
11.1

0.8
5.0
11.1

0.8
5.0
11.1

0.8
5.0
11.1

1

Brazilian risk-free rate estimated as: (1 + U.S. risk free rate) × (1 + Brazilian inflation) ÷ (1 + U.S. inflation) – 1.
Source: Banco Central do Brasil, Bloomberg, EIU Viewswire, McKinsey analysis.

our estimate for the unlevered industry beta is 0.55, translating into an equity beta for ConsuCo of 0.8 (given a debt-to-capital target weight of 0.3, as
discussed later).

Market risk premium As discussed in Chapter 21, excess returns of local
equity markets over local bond returns are not a good proxy for the market
risk premium. This holds even more so for emerging markets given the lack
of diversification in the local equity market. Furthermore, the quality and
length of available data on equity and bond market returns are usually unsuitable for making long-term estimates. To use a market risk premium that
is consistent with the perspective of a global investor, use a global estimate
(as discussed in Chapter 10) of 4.5 to 5.5 percent.
In Exhibit 22.11, we summarize the nominal cost of equity calculation
for ConsuCo. In the base case, we have assumed a decreasing rate of inflation for the Brazilian economy from 7.1 percent in 2004 to 4.4 percent in
2008 and beyond. This is also reflected in the cost of capital estimates going
forward. For the downside scenario, inflation projections follow a different
trajectory, and the cost of capital for this scenario is adjusted accordingly.
Estimating the After-Tax Cost of Debt
In most emerging economies, there are no liquid markets for corporate
bonds, so little or no market information is available to estimate the cost of
debt. However, from an international investor’s perspective, the cost of debt
in local currency should simply equal the sum of the dollar (or euro) riskfree rate, the systematic part of the credit spread,17 and the inflation differ17

See Chapter 10 for more on the systematic part of the credit spread.

ESTIMATING COST OF CAPITAL IN EMERGING MARKETS

645

Exhibit 22.12 ConsuCo: Estimating the Nominal Cost of Debt
percent

Risk-free interest rate
BBB credit spread
Systematic credit spread for B+
Cost of debt
Tax rate
After-tax cost of debt

2004
9.8
1.2
0.5
11.5

2005
8.2
1.2
0.5
9.9

2006
7.5
1.2
0.5
9.2

2007
7.2
1.2
0.5
8.9

2008
7.0
1.2
0.5
8.8

2009
7.0
1.2
0.5
8.8

2014
7.0
1.2
0.5
8.8

2019
7.0
1.2
0.5
8.8

34
7.6

34
6.6

34
6.1

34
5.9

34
5.8

34
5.8

34
5.8

34
5.8

Source: Standard & Poor’s, McKinsey analysis.

ential between local currency and dollars (or euros). Most of the country
risk can be diversified away in a global bond portfolio. Therefore, the systematic part of the default risk is probably no larger than that of companies
in international markets, and the cost of debt should not include a separate
country risk premium (see Chapter 10 for details on the systematic part
of credit spread). This explains why the funding costs of multinationals
with extensive emerging-market portfolios, companies including Coca-Cola
and Colgate-Palmolive, have a cost of debt no higher than their mainly U.S.focused competitors.
Returning to the ConsuCo example, we calculated the cost of debt in
Brazilian Reais. ConsuCo does not have its own credit rating, but based on
its EBITDA coverage ratios versus rated peers, we estimated that ConsuCo
would probably have a B to B+ rating. ConsuCo’s cost of debt can be estimated as the sum of the risk-free rate in Brazilian Reais plus the systematic
credit spread for a U.S. corporate bond rated B+ versus the U.S. government
bond yield as shown in Exhibit 22.12. Of course, the inflation assumptions
underlying the estimates for cost of debt should be consistent with those for
the base-case and downside scenarios.
Remember that ConsuCo’s cost of debt is significantly lower than the interest rate it is currently paying because the latter represents the promised
yield, not the expected yield.
The marginal tax rate in emerging markets can be very different from
the effective tax rate, which often includes investment tax credits, export
tax credits, taxes, equity or dividend credits, and operating loss credits.
Many of these do not provide a tax shield on interest expense. Only taxes
that apply to interest expense should be used in the WACC estimate. Other
taxes or credits should be modeled directly in the cash flows. For ConsuCo,
we used the Brazilian corporate income tax rate of 25 percent plus social
contribution tax of 9 percent.

646

VALUATION IN EMERGING MARKETS

Estimating WACC
Given the estimates for cost of equity and after-tax cost of debt, we need
debt and equity weights to derive an estimate of the weighted average cost
of capital. In emerging markets, many companies have unusual capital
structures compared with their international peers. One reason is, of
course, the country risk. The possibility of macroeconomic distress makes
companies more conservative in setting their leverage. Another reason
could be anomalies in the local debt or equity markets. In the long run,
when the anomalies are corrected, the companies should expect to converge
to a capital structure similar to that of their global competitors. You could
forecast explicitly how the company evolves to a capital structure that is
more similar to global standards. In that case, you should consider using
the APV approach discussed in Chapter 5.
For the ConsuCo case, we kept the capital structure going forward at its
long-term historical levels, with leverage somewhat below the peer group average at a ratio of debt to enterprise value of 0.3. Exhibit 22.13 summarizes the
WACC estimates for both the base case and downside scenario in nominal
terms. Note how the extreme inflation assumption underlying the downside
scenario leads to a radically higher cost of capital in the crisis years until 2009.

Estimating the Country Risk Premium
If you are discounting business-as-usual cash flows instead of expected cash
flows, you should add a country risk premium to the WACC. There is no
agreed-upon approach to estimating this premium, but we have some advice.

Do not simply use the sovereign risk premium The long-term sovereign
risk premium equals the difference between a long-term (e.g., 10-year) U.S.

Exhibit 22.13 ConsuCo: Estimating Nominal WACC for ConsuCo
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2014

2019

Base case
After-tax cost of debt (percent)
Cost of equity (percent)
Debt/enterprise value
WACC (percent)

7.6
14.0
0.3
12.0

6.6
12.4
0.3
10.5

6.1
11.7
0.3
9.9

5.9
11.3
0.3
9.5

5.8
11.1
0.3
9.4

5.8
11.1
0.3
9.4

5.8
11.1
0.3
9.4

5.8
11.1
0.3
9.4

Downside
After-tax cost of debt (percent)
Cost of equity (percent)
Debt/enterprise value
WACC (percent)

7.6
14.0
0.3
12.0

37.1
59.6
0.3
52.3

105.9
166.0
0.3
146.5

37.1
59.6
0.3
52.3

19.9
33.0
0.3
28.8

6.2
11.7
0.3
9.9

5.8
11.1
0.3
9.4

5.8
11.1
0.3
9.4

ESTIMATING COST OF CAPITAL IN EMERGING MARKETS

647

government bond yield and a dollar-denominated local bond’s stripped
yield18 with the same maturity. This difference will reasonably approximate the country risk premium only if the cash flows of the corporation
being valued move closely in line with the payments on government bonds.
This is not necessarily the case. In the consumer goods or raw-materials sector, for example, cash flows have low correlation with local government
bond payments and lower volatility.

Understand estimates from different sources Estimates for country risk
premiums from different sources usually fall in a very wide range because
analysts use different methods.19 But they frequently compensate for high
estimates of country risk premiums by making aggressive estimates for
growth and return forecasts.
An example is the valuation of a large Brazilian chemicals company that
we undertook in 2002. Using a local WACC of 10 percent, we reached an enterprise value of 4.0 to 4.5 times EBITDA. A second advisor was also asked
to value the company and came to a very similar valuation result—an
EBITDA multiple of around 4.5 —in spite of using a very high country risk
premium of 11 percent on top of the WACC. The result was similar because
the second advisor made performance assumptions that were extremely aggressive: real sales growth of almost 10 percent per year and a ROIC increasing to 46 percent in the long term. Such long-term performance
assumptions are unrealistic for a commodity-based, competitive industry
such as chemicals.
Be careful to avoid setting the country risk premium too high Make sure
you understand the economic implications of a high country risk premium.
We believe that a country risk premium for Brazil is far below the premiums
of 5 percent and higher that analysts typically use.
One reason is that current valuations in the stock market do not support the discount rates implied by higher risk premiums. We estimated the
trading multiples of enterprise value to the 2004 forecasted EBITA for the
30 largest Brazilian companies in terms of market capitalization. The median value for the multiple was 7.4 in October 2004. We estimated the implied WACC by means of a DCF valuation. We set the future long-term
return on invested capital at 11 percent, approximately equal to the median
historical ROIC for these companies over the past five or six years (a period
after Brazil brought inflation under control, so it is indicative of a businessas-usual scenario). Assuming future long-term inflation at 4.4 percent and
18

Some emerging markets’ country debt is partially guaranteed by international institutions or
backed by U.S. Treasury bonds. For these bonds, you need to estimate the yield on the nonguaranteed part of the bond, the “stripped” yield. Stripped yields are available from bond data suppliers.
19
For an overview, see, for example, L. Pereiro, Valuation of Companies in Emerging Markets: A
Practical Approach (New York: Wiley, 2002), 118.

648

VALUATION IN EMERGING MARKETS

real growth at 3.0 percent for the Brazilian economy as a whole, the WACC
for the Brazilian market implied by the EBITA multiple of 7.4 is around 10.3
percent. The WACC estimated with the CAPM method previously described is around 9.8 percent.20 This would imply a country risk premium
for Brazil of around 0.5 percent. Of course, this is not a precise estimate; as
the Brazilian market goes up and down, the implied WACC and country
risk premium would change as well. But it does suggest a country risk premium that is far below the 5 percent that many analysts currently use.
The other reason for such a low country risk premium is that historical
returns in the Brazilian stock market do not support a high premium. The
average real-terms return on the Brazilian stock market over the past 10
years is 3.8 percent per year. Let’s take this period as a proxy for a businessas-usual scenario: real GPD grew by around 2 percent per year on average,
and inflation was moderate at around 9 percent annually. At a country risk
premium of 5 percent, the expected return on a stock with a beta equal to
one under a business-as-usual scenario should be around 12 percent in real
terms,21 which is far above these historical returns.

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS
Given the estimates for cash flow and the cost of capital, we can discount
the free cash flows for ConsuCo under the base-case and downside scenarios. The resulting present values of operations are shown in Exhibit 22.14.
Under each scenario, the valuation results are exactly the same for the nominal and real projections. The next step is to weight the valuation results by
the scenario probabilities and derive the present value of operations. Finally, add the market value of the nonoperating assets and subtract the financial claims to get at the estimated equity value. The estimated value
obtained for ConsuCo is 188 to 206 Reais per share, given a probability of
economic distress of 25 to 35 percent.
ConsuCo’s share price, like the Brazilian stock market in general, has
been extremely volatile over recent years, as shown in Exhibit 22.15 on page
650. Thus, you need to be careful in comparing the valuation outcome of 188
to 206 Reais per share with the current (December 2004) share price of 230
Reais. Just four months earlier, the price was 150 Reais. At the beginning of
that year it traded for 270 Reais.
Of course, in emerging markets share prices are not always reliable references for intrinsic value, for several reasons. First, free float is often limited,
with large equity stakes in the hands of a small group of owners, leaving
20
Based on a real risk-free rate of 2 percent, long-term inf lation of 4.4 percent, a market risk premium of 5.0 percent, cost of debt of 7.6 percent, and a debt-to-capital ratio of 0.25.
21
Assuming a real risk-free rate of 2 percent and a market risk premium of 5 percent.

649

1

206
(188)

p1 = 25%
(35%)

p = probability of economic distress.

Value
per
share
(Reais)

1 – p1 = 75%
(65%)

Reais million, percent

DCF value
Nonoperating assets
Debt and debt equivalents
Equity value
Value per share (Reais)

DCF value
Nonoperating assets
Debt and debt equivalents
Equity value
Value per share (Reais)

12,427
3,010
(11,097)
4,340
67

24,459
3,010
(11,097)
16,372
253

Exhibit 22.14 ConsuCo: Scenario DCF Valuation

Downside
Nominal projections
Free cash flow
WACC (percent)
Real projections
Free cash flow
WACC (percent)

Base case
Nominal projections
Free cash flow
WACC (percent)
Real projections
Free cash flow
WACC (percent)
(143)
4.6

309
4.5

(12)
4.7

(14)
9.9

2006

134
4.7

166
9.5

2007

293
4.7

379
9.4

2008

615
4.7

833
9.4

2009

126 (1,753) (2,786) (1,859) (1,392)
4.5
1.5
(1.4)
1.5
3.0

(511)
4.7

135 (2,817) (11,192) (11,205) (10,491) (4,039)
12.0
52.3 146.5
52.3
28.8
9.9

(161)
10.5

2005

331
12.0

2004

(392)
4.7

(3,851)
9.4

633
4.7

1,065
9.4

2014

656
4.7

8,004
9.4

714
4.7

1,491
9.4

2019

650

VALUATION IN EMERGING MARKETS

Exhibit 22.15 ConsuCo: Historical Share Price Development
Reais
300

250
206 DCF
valuation
range
188

200

150

100

50

05

4
n

20

00
Ja

v2
No

04

20
04
Se
p

4
00

20
Ju
l

ay
2
M

20
ar
M

n

20

04

04

3
00
Ja

v2
No

20
03

20
Ju
l

Se
p

03

0

public shareholders with little or no influence. As a result, the share price in
the market could well be below intrinsic value, as estimated from a DCF
analysis. Also, liquidity in emerging-markets stocks is often much lower
than in developed markets. Share prices may not fully reflect intrinsic value
because not all information is incorporated in the market value. Finally,
share prices in emerging markets are often much more volatile than in developed markets. The share price on any particular day could therefore be
off from intrinsic value.
ConsuCo has a primary listing on the Brazilian stock exchange. Turnover in the stock, as measured by the number of days to trade the free float,
is around 130 days, not too far above typical levels of around 100 days in the
United States and Europe. Still, because of the share price volatility, triangulation of the DCF results with multiples and a country risk premium approach is important.

Triangulating with Multiples and Country Risk Premium Approach
For triangulation with multiples, we apply Chapter 12’s guidance on how to
do a best-practice multiples analysis to check valuation results. For the ConsuCo example, we compared the implied multiples of enterprise value over
EBITDA with those of peer companies across the world. All multiples are
forward-looking multiples over EBITDA as expected for 2005, based on ana-

CALCULATING AND INTERPRETING RESULTS

651

Exhibit 22.16 ConsuCo: Multiples Analysis versus Peers
EV/EBITDA 05
12.9

12.4

9.6

9.1

11

Pe
e

rC

o

10

9

o

o
rC

rC
Pe
e

o
rC

Pe
e

uC

Pe
e

ns
Co

8

o1

7
o

6

rC

o
rC

Pe
e

5
o
rC

Pe
e

Pe
e

o

3
o

rC
Pe
e

2

rC
Pe
e

rC

o

1
o
rC

Pe
e

4

6.2

6.1

Pe
e

7.4-7.8

7.4

7.1

7.0

6.9

6.8

1

Multiple of EV/EBITDA implied by DCF valuation range.

lyst consensus forecasts. As Exhibit 22.16 illustrates, the implied multiple
from our ConsuCo valuation is quite similar to most of its peers, at around
seven times EBITDA. Apparently, the fact that ConsuCo is domiciled in
Brazil does not matter much for the relative pricing of its stock. This is another indication that any country risk premium for ConsuCo should be very
small. Using the average multiple for the peer group of 8.3, the value of ConsuCo would end up at 228 Reais, as shown in Exhibit 22.17. Note that this is

Exhibit 22.17 ConsuCo: Valuation Summary
Reais, million
Scenario DCF
valuation1
low

Scenario DCF
valuation1
high

Average
multiple
valuation
8.3
2,746

Median
multiple
valuation
7.1
2,746

Country risk
premium DCF
valuation

EBITDA multiple
EBITDA 2005

1

DCF value
Nonoperating assets
Debt and debt
equivalents
Equity value

20,248
3,010
(11,097)

21,451
3,010
(11,097)

22,841
3,010
(11,097)

19,496
3,010
(11,097)

18,933
3,010
(11,097)

12,161

13,364

14,754

11,409

10,846

Number of shares
(million)
Value per share

65

65

65

65

65

188

206

228

176

167

Shown are the probability-weighted values.

652

VALUATION IN EMERGING MARKETS

probably an aggressive estimate, given that there are some outliers in the
peer group with extremely high multiples. Using the median multiple of 7.1
would lead to a valuation estimate of 176 Reais per share.
The last part of the triangulation consists of a valuation of ConsuCo
using a country risk premium approach. We estimated the country risk premium for Brazil at around 0.5 percent earlier in this chapter. Discounting
the business-as-usual scenario at the cost of capital plus this country risk
premium leads to a value per share of 167 Reais, below the result obtained
in the scenario DCF approach.
Note that a risk premium of 5 percent (as typically used in Brazil) would
either result in unrealistically low valuations relative to current share price
and peer group multiples, or require an unrealistic, bullish forecast of future performance with returns on capital of at least 15 percent and real
growth rates of at least 6 percent for many years. Given long-term returns
and growth in its industry and the historical performance of ConsuCo, even
taking just the good years into account, such forecasts are unreasonable.
Given the inherent uncertainty in valuing emerging-market companies,
it is best to use an explicit value range instead of a point estimate. For ConsuCo, we summarize the valuation findings in Exhibit 22.17. Based on the
DCF valuation and multiples comparison, we end up with a range of about
175 to 205 Reais per share, depending on the exact scenario and probability
assumptions, compared with a 12-month share price range of 150 to 270
Reais per share.

SUMMARY
To value companies in emerging markets, we use concepts similar to the
ones applied to developed markets. However, the application of these concepts can be somewhat different. Inflation, which is often high in emerging
markets, is factored into the cash flow projections by combining insights
from both real and nominal financial analyses. Emerging market risks such
as macroeconomic or political crises can be incorporated following the scenario DCF approach by developing alternative scenarios for future cash
flows, discounting the cash flows at the cost of capital without country risk
premium, and then weighting the DCF values by the scenario probabilities.
The cost of capital estimates for emerging markets build on the assumption
of a global risk-free rate, market risk premium and beta, following guidelines similar to those used for developed markets. Since the value of companies in emerging markets is often more volatile than in developed
markets, we recommend triangulating the scenario DCF results with a
country risk premium DCF and a multiples-based valuation.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

653

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Identify and describe three adjustments to the enterprise DCF and
economic profit models when attempting to establish the value of a
company located in an emerging market.
2. Define purchasing power parity. What is the importance of purchasing
power parity to an analyst attempting to establish value for a company located in an emerging market?
3. Describe the impact of high inflation on the financial statements of a
company headquartered in an emerging market. What unique challenges does inflation present to an analyst?
4. Describe the five-step approach managers should employ to combine
nominal and real forecasts.
5. Identify four risks associated with emerging markets that impact
enterprise DCF valuation. How should these risks be treated within
the enterprise DCF model?
6. Describe the benefits of a scenario DCF valuation model. What factors should be considered when constructing scenario parameters?
7. You are computing the value of a firm headquartered in an emerging
market. Identify the factors unique to an emerging market that need
to be evaluated when estimating the cost of equity via the CAPM.
8. Why must a manager construct both real and nominal corporate forecasts? Illustrate the effects of depreciation and taxation on forecasting by paying special attention to high, low, and crash inflation
scenarios. Draw a flow chart that details a method for forecasting financial variables.
9. Catalogue emerging market risks with examples of effects on valuation components. Discuss the merits of including risk adjustments in
cash flow or in discount rates.

23
Valuing High-Growth
Companies
In the late 1990s, Internet entrepreneurs quickly transformed business
ideas into billion-dollar valuations that seemed to defy common wisdom
about profits, cash flows, and valuation multiples. As we learned from the
rise and fall of Internet stocks, valuing high-growth, high-uncertainty
companies is a challenge; some practitioners have even described it as
hopeless.
The valuation principles in this book work well even for high-growth
companies.1 The best way to value high-growth companies (those whose organic revenue growth exceeds 15 percent annually) is with a classic DCF
valuation, buttressed by microeconomic fundamentals and probabilityweighted scenarios. Although scenario-based DCF may sound suspiciously
retro, it works where other methods fail, since the elements of economics
and finance apply even in uncharted territory. Nevertheless, while scenariobased DCF techniques can help bound and quantify uncertainty, they will
not make it disappear. High-growth companies have volatile stock prices for
sound and logical reasons.

DCF ANALYSIS WHEN THERE IS NO CASH FLOW
When Internet stocks peaked in early 2000, the most common critique
about valuation was that market values appeared to increase as losses grew
1

In this chapter, we analyze companies that are growing quickly through new products, new
technologies, and a rapidly growing end-product market. Companies that generate abovenormal revenue growth through acquisitions, currency f luctuations, and accounting changes
are analyzed in Chapter 7.

655

656

VALUING HIGH-GROWTH COMPANIES

larger. The perceived correlation between ever-higher stock prices and
ever-higher losses became a rich source of jokes for cartoonists and standup comedians, even though the phenomenon is consistent with economic
principles.
Losses and value rise at the same time because today’s supernormal
growth often requires large investments that companies expense through
the income statement, instead of capitalizing them on the balance sheet.
For instance, many Internet-related start-ups experienced annual growth
rates exceeding 100 percent. Fueling this growth required significant investment. Yet Internet and other technology-related companies typically
do not invest in physical assets that are capitalized, such as physical
equipment and factories. These start-ups invest primarily in customer acquisition, through advertising and direct mail. That spending must be expensed through the income statement. With limited exceptions, research
and development also must be expensed in the current period.2 Because
these companies expensed, rather than capitalized, their investments, significant losses replaced growing balance sheets. Analysts were skeptical
of companies with only moderate losses and asked, “Are they investing
enough to win?”
High growth and accounting losses make discounted cash flow valuation challenging. Even so, DCF remains the best method. Alternatives, such
as price-earnings multiples, generate extremely imprecise results (earnings
are highly volatile), often cannot be used (when earnings are negative), and
provide little insight about what drives the company’s valuation. More important, these shorthand methods cannot account for the uniqueness of
each company in a fast-changing environment. Another alternative—real
options—is promising, but current implementation techniques still require
estimates of the long-term revenue growth rate, long-term volatility of revenue growth, and profit margins—the same requirements as for discounted
cash flow.3
Since DCF remains our preferred method, why dedicate a chapter to
high-growth companies? Although the components of valuation are the
same, their order and emphasis differ from the traditional process for established companies. Instead of starting by analyzing historical performance, we start by examining the expected long-term development of the
company’s markets and then work backwards. In addition, since longterm projections are highly uncertain, always create multiple scenarios.
2
FASB Statement No. 86 allows certain development costs of computer software to be capitalized, once the software is technologically feasible.
3
Schwartz and Moon value Amazon.com using real options. To generate a real options valuation, however, they estimate that long-term mean revenue growth equals 6 percent, revenue
growth volatility equals 10 percent, and COGS margins equal 75 percent of revenues. Eduardo
Schwartz and Mark Moon, “Rational Pricing of Internet Companies,” Financial Analysts Journal,
56(3) (2000): 62–75.

THE VALUATION PROCESS

657

Each scenario details how the market might develop under different conditions. The DCF approach cannot eliminate the need to make difficult
forecasts, but it coherently addresses the problems of ultrahigh growth
rates and uncertainty.

THE VALUATION PROCESS
For the valuation of an established company, the first step is to analyze
historical performance. But in the case of a high-growth company, historical financial results provide limited clues about future prospects. Therefore, begin with the future, not with the past. Focus on sizing the future
market, predicting the level of profitability, and estimating the investments necessary to achieve success. To do this, choose a point well into the
future, at a time when financial performance is likely to stabilize, and
begin forecasting.
Once you have developed a forecast such that the company’s economics are stable, work backward to link it to current performance. Current performance is likely to commingle investments and expenses,
so when possible, capitalize hidden investments (even those expensed
under traditional accounting rules). This is challenging, as the distinction
between investment and expense is often unobservable and usually
subjective.
Given the uncertainty associated with high-growth companies, do not
rely on a single long-term forecast. Describe the market’s development in
terms of multiple scenarios including total size, ease of competitive entry,
and so on. When you build a comprehensive scenario, be sure all forecasts,
including revenue growth, profitability margins, and required investment, are consistent with the underlying assumptions of the particular
scenario.
Finally, apply probabilistic weights to each scenario. The weights must
be consistent with long-term historical evidence on corporate growth. As we
saw during the Internet run-up, valuations that rely too heavily on unrealistic assessments can lead to overestimates of value and strategic errors.
To a certain extent, the concepts behind probability-weighted scenarios
are similar to those for real options valuation. By using a few well-developed
scenarios instead of the more complicated modeling associated with real
options, we can highlight the economic issues driving a company’s value
(which complex models often hide). In addition, real option valuation relies
on tracking portfolios to replicate the company’s cash flows. But what is the
proper tracking portfolio for a new concept in uncharted territory? Real options valuation has potential but is still of limited applicability (for more on
real options valuation, see Chapter 20).

658

VALUING HIGH-GROWTH COMPANIES

Start from the Future
When valuing high-growth companies, start by thinking about what the industry and company might look like as the company evolves from its current
high-growth, uncertain condition to a sustainable, moderate growth state
in the future. Then interpolate back to current performance. The future
state should be defined and bounded by measures of operating performance, such as penetration rates, average revenue per customer, and sustainable gross margins. Next, determine how long hyper growth will
continue before stabilizing to normal levels. Since most high-growth companies are start-ups, stable economics probably lie at least 10 to 15 years in
the future.
To demonstrate the specifics of the process, let’s examine Internet retailer Amazon.com. Amazon’s revenues grew from $150 million in 1997 to
nearly $7 billion in 2004. To put this extraordinary growth in perspective,
compare it with the first seven years’ revenues of four other high-growth,
successful companies: Dell, Home Depot, Microsoft, and Wal-Mart (see Exhibit 23.1). Whereas Amazon.com reached $6.9 billion in seven years, Dell
grew to annual revenue of $3.3 billion, Home Depot grew to $3.0 billion, Microsoft to $2.9 billion, and Wal-Mart to only $1.5 billion over the same number of years.
Amazon’s ability to enter and lead categories is unprecedented, in both
the off-line and the online worlds. In 1998, the company took just three
months to banish CDnow to second place among online purveyors of music.

Exhibit 23.1 Revenue Growth after Reaching $150 Million Threshold
(Normalized to Amazon.com)
$ billion
8
Amazon.com

7
6
5
4

Dell
Home Depot
Microsoft

3
2

Wal-Mart
1
0
1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

THE VALUATION PROCESS

659

Exhibit 23.2 North American Media Sales
$ billion
70
6% CAGR

60
50
7% CAGR
40
30
20
10
0
1999

2000

Historical

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Forecast

CAGR = Compound annual growth rate
Source: Friedland, J., “Amazon.com” analyst report. SG Cowen & Co. (January 4, 2005), p. 15.

In early 1999, it assumed the leadership position among online sellers of
videos in 45 days; later that year, it became the leading online seller of consumer electronics in only 10 days. More recently, the company has expanded through fee-driven services: Marketplace for small businesses and
Merchants@ for large, branded businesses.
But can this revenue growth continue? To answer this question, forecast
how each of Amazon’s retail product markets will grow, how much of each
product market will be captured by Internet retailers, and what share of online purchases Amazon.com is likely to control. Exhibit 23.2 presents a forecast of North American media sales estimated by the investment banking
firm SG Cowen.4 The forecast was created by aggregating separate forecasts
of media’s major subsegments: books, videos, CDs, and DVDs. In the case of
books, growth is slow and steady, with little uncertainty. Simple extrapolation suffices. In contrast, DVD players are somewhat new, so the market for
DVDs is still developing. To forecast DVD sales, the analysts estimated
DVD player penetration rates and combined the estimate for player penetration with average household expenditures for homes with and without
DVD players.
Once a base forecast is developed for each product category, assess online penetration rates. To do this, SG Cowen relied on consumer surveys for
each product category. For example, 26 percent of respondents expected
to increase online purchases of media, whereas only 14 percent planned to
4

Jim Leeland, “Amazon.com: Expect Increasing ROIC to Drive Long-Term Value,” SG Cowen &
Co., San Francisco, January 4, 2005.

660

VALUING HIGH-GROWTH COMPANIES

Exhibit 23.3 North American Media Market: 2009 Forecast
percent
On-line versus
off-line purchases

Amazon.com share of
on-line purchases

100% = $66 billion

100% = $7.3 billion

On-line, 11%
Off-line, 89%

Barnes
& Noble, 10%
Amazon.com, 57%

Others, 33%

Source: Friedland, J., “Amazon.com” analyst report. SG Cowen & Co. (January 4, 2005), pp. 16–17.

increase online purchases of kitchen supplies and cookware. Based on this
analysis, SG Cowen forecasts online penetration of media to grow from 8
percent in 2004 to 11 percent in 2009 (see Exhibit 23.3).
Finally, forecast Amazon.com’s share of the online market. In 2004,
Amazon.com led the market for online media sales with a 64 percent market
share. At a distant second, with only 11 percent of the market, was Barnes &
Noble. But even in its leading position, Amazon.com has lost share to competitors (its market share of online media dropped from 78 percent in 1999
to 64 percent in 2004). Predicting that the share will continue to drop, SG
Cowen estimates Amazon.com’s market share at 57 percent in 2009. By applying this share to the size of the market, SG Cowen projects North American media revenue of $4.3 billion. Using a similar analysis for Amazon.com’s
other products, as well as the company’s international sales, leads to a base
estimate of $19 billion in 2009.5
With a revenue forecast in hand, next forecast long-term ROIC. For
Amazon.com, this requires an assessment of the improved efficiency of Internet retailers versus traditional bricks-and-mortar companies as well as
the strength of competitive barriers to entry. Internet retailers have certain
operational advantages, but can they protect those advantages? Or will Internet companies pass them to consumers in the form of lower prices?
To start our analysis (and ground it in actual data), we examined the
ROIC characteristics of five retailers: Barnes & Noble, Best Buy, Dell, Lands’
End, and Wal-Mart. Barnes & Noble is a traditional media retailer, with a
5

Ideally, we would prefer longer-dated estimates, given Amazon.com’s rapidly changing business. For pragmatic reasons, we start with assessments generated by others.

THE VALUATION PROCESS

661

Exhibit 23.4 Key Value Drivers for Major Retailers, 2003
EBITA margin
(percent)

Best Buy

5.3

Dell

1.2
3.6

7.2
5.3

ROIC (percent)
6.5

8.6

Lands’ End (2001)1
Wal-Mart

Capital turnover (times)
8.5

Barnes & Noble

12.4
11.3

62.9

3.4
3.3

15.7
11.2

1

In 2002, Lands’ End was purchased by Sears.

focus on books and music. Best Buy sells mostly electronics but also carries
an extensive selection of music, videos, and DVDs. Dell is a manufacturer
and online retailer of personal computers. Before being purchased by Sears
in 2002, Lands’ End was an independent retailer, primarily selling through
mail order. Wal-Mart, the largest retailer in the world, sells a wide selection
of consumer goods. Exhibit 23.4 presents a breakdown of pretax operating
margins, capital turnover, and ROIC for each company.6 Profit margin is
quite tight across companies, varying between 5.3 percent and 8.6 percent.
Capital turnover, however, varies greatly. Barnes & Noble generates little
more than $1 in revenue for each dollar in invested capital, whereas Best
Buy, Lands’ End, and Wal-Mart all generate approximately $3.50 in revenue
per dollar of invested capital. Dell, using a build-to-order manufacturing
process and no retail stores, generates $11.30 in revenue for every dollar of
invested capital.
But given that Dell is an online retailer and manufacturer, is the company’s capital turnover even relevant for valuing Amazon.com? For guidance on this question, we compared Amazon’s current inventory holding
period with that of the other retailers. Amazon’s inventory holding period
averages 17 days, whereas Best Buy and Wal-Mart average near 35 days. Dell
averages only six days in inventory. If the difference in current inventory
turns is a good predictor of future invested capital turnover, Amazon’s
long-term capital turnover should lie between that of Dell and traditional
retailers. Perhaps eight times is appropriate.7
6

All three ratios have been adjusted for operating leases.
Given the uncertainty surrounding any forecast, we use a back-of-the-envelope calculation for
capital turns. A more rigorous approach would consider systematic differences between traditional retailers and online retailers. For example, how would capital turnover change for a traditional retailer if we eliminated net property, plant, and equipment related to stores but not
warehouses?
7

662

VALUING HIGH-GROWTH COMPANIES

Using a pretax profit margin of 8 percent times a capital turnover of
eight times along with a 37.5 percent tax rate, we estimate a long-term ROIC
at 40 percent. But what about competition? If ROIC is so high, shouldn’t competitors steal share and eventually force prices down? For Amazon.com, this
is a serious concern and probably the largest threat to the company’s valuation. But a long-term return on capital of 40 percent probably overestimates
the company’s cumulative ROIC, especially if early losses are reclassified as
investments. We examine this issue in the next section.

Work Backward to Current Performance
Having completed a forecast for total market size, market share, and return
on invested capital, reconnect the long-term forecast back to current performance. To do this, we have to assess the speed of transition from current
performance to future long-term performance. Estimates must be consistent with economic principles and industry characteristics. For instance,
from the perspective of operating margin, how long will fixed costs dominate variable costs, resulting in low margins? Concerning capital turnover,
what scale is required before revenues rise faster than capital? As scale is
reached, will competition drive down prices? Often, there are more questions than answers.
One way to estimate the speed of transition is to look historically. Consider Amazon’s improvement in operating margin between 1999 and 2003.
In 1999, Amazon.com earned a negative EBITA margin of −23.4 percent.
Over the next two years, margins increased by approximately 11 percentage
points per year, to −1.6 percent. Then margin improvement dramatically
slowed. In 2002, margin improvement declined to only 4.4 percentage
points, and by 2003, margin improvement was only 2.2 percentage points.
Assuming that this trend of margin improvements continuing to decline by
a little less than half endures, the EBITA margin will reach 8 percent by
2009, consistent with our point forecast from the previous section (see Exhibit 23.5).
Historical financial performance for high-growth companies is often
misleading, because long-term investments for today’s high-growth companies tend to be intangible. Under current accounting rules, these investments must be expensed. Therefore, both early accounting profits and
invested capital will be understated. We illustrate this by continuing our
examination of Amazon.com. By year-end 2003, the company had an accumulated deficit of $3.0 billion, even though revenues and gross profits had
grown steadily. How could this occur? Marketing- and technology-related
expenses significantly outweighed gross profits. In the years between 1999
and 2003, Amazon.com expensed $742 million in marketing and $1.1 billion in technology development. In 1999, Amazon’s marketing expense was

THE VALUATION PROCESS

663

Exhibit 23.5 Amazon.com: EBITA Margin
percent

Historical

Forecast
5.2

6.5

7.2

7.6

7.8

7.9

8.0

2004
1.3

2005
0.7

2006
0.4

2007
0.2

2008
0.1

2009
0.1

2.8

(1.6)

(12.4)

(23.4)
1999
Annual margin
improvement

2000
11.0

2001
10.8

2002
4.4

2003
2.4

10 percent of revenue. In contrast, Best Buy spends about 2 percent of revenue for advertising. One might argue that the 8 percent differential is
more appropriately classified as a brand-building activity, not a short-term
revenue driver.
In the previous section, we used the performance of mature retailers to
generate a long-term estimate of ROIC for Amazon.com at 40 percent. This
ROIC, however, overstates the potential return on capital for new entrants,
because it ignores historically expensed investment.8 In niche areas, competitors probably will enter. But on a broad base, other online retailers may hesitate to compete directly with Amazon.com because of the heavy required
investments in technology and brand building. Competitors may doubt that
the potential profits justifies the incremental billions required.

Develop Scenarios
A simple and straightforward way to deal with uncertainty associated with
high-growth companies is to use probability-weighted scenarios. Using just
a few scenarios makes critical assumptions and interactions more transparent than other modeling approaches, such as real options and Monte Carlo
8
The way a company classifies advertising will not affect cash f low. The money has been spent
regardless. But reclassifying certain expenditures as invest ments will lower ROIC in future
years.

664

VALUING HIGH-GROWTH COMPANIES

Exhibit 23.6 Amazon.com: Potential Outcomes, 2009

Revenues
($ billion)

EBITA margin
(percent)

Scenario A
Dominant player

23.5

Scenario B
Base case

18.9

Scenario C
Weak margins

18.9

Scenario D
Traditional retailer

14.0

Capital turns
(times)
8.0

8.0

21.2

8.0

8.0

13.5

8.0

7.9

5.2

5.2

2003
Discounted
cash flow equity
value ($ billion)

3.5

2.9

simulation. To use probability-weighted scenarios, estimate a future set of
financials for a full range of outcomes—some optimistic, some pessimistic.
For Amazon.com, we have developed four potential scenarios for 2009,
summarized in Exhibit 23.6. In Scenario A, we assume Amazon.com succeeds on all fronts. The company is able to generate $23.5 billion in revenues
by 2009, its pretax operating margin rises to 8 percent (the high end of our
retail sample), and its capital turnover stabilizes at eight times ( between
traditional retailers and Dell). This assessment leads to an estimated equity
valuation of $21.2 billion.
In Scenario B, our base scenario, revenues grow to $18.9 billion in
2009, pretax margins rise to 8 percent, and capital turns equal eight times.
In the second scenario, Amazon.com has an estimated equity value equal
to $13.5 billion.
In Scenario C, we assume Amazon.com can generate $18.9 billion in revenue by 2009 but operating margins remain at the 2003 level of 5.2 percent.
Again, capital turns equal eight times. In Scenario C, Amazon.com’s estimated equity valuation equals $7.9 billion.
Scenario D assumes that Amazon.com generates only $14.0 billion in
revenue by 2009 and that margins and turns are consistent with traditional
retailers. In Scenario D, online retailing mimics most other industries, with
many competitors in each field. This competition transfers most of the
value for going online to consumers. Assuming margins remain at 5.2 percent and capital turns equal just 3.5 times, Amazon.com has an equity value
of only $2.9 billion.
Because Amazon.com’s resulting equity value in Scenario D is much
lower than the company’s current market value, it is necessary to separately
value the company’s debt. After further analysis, it appears that book value
suffices even in Scenario D because Amazon.com’s net debt (total debt
minus excess cash) is quite low. Had this not been the case, there is a good

THE VALUATION PROCESS

665

chance Amazon.com’s debt value would have been lower than book because
of a higher probability of default. You must take this into consideration
when determining equity value in pessimistic scenarios (for more on scenario analysis and its impact on financial claims, see Chapter 11).
Besides using scenarios to prepare our valuation, we can use scenario
analysis to determine the value impact of changes in individual drivers. If
we move from Scenario A to Scenario B, expected revenue growth drops
from a six-year compounded rate of 28.4 percent to 23.7 percent, and estimated equity value drops $7.6 billion (a drop of 36 percent). If we move
from Scenario B to Scenario C, long-term operating margins drop from 8.0
percent to 5.2 percent, and estimated equity value drops $5.6 billion (a decline of 42 percent).

Weight Scenarios Consistently with Historical Evidence
During the Internet boom, rising stock prices were hard to ignore. When Internet stocks reached their peak, economic reality seemed to conflict with
widely accepted beliefs in efficient markets. Following the dramatic fall,
however, economic reality once again appears to have triumphed. As a result, today we believe more than ever that probabilistic weightings and their
resulting valuations must be consistent with economic evidence on longterm corporate performance.
To derive current equity value for Amazon.com, we weight the potential
equity value from each scenario by its estimated likelihood of occurrence.
Exhibit 23.7 lists the potential equity value and the probability of occurrence
for each scenario. To estimate the company’s current equity value, sum
across each scenario’s contribution. Based on our probability assessments,
we estimate Amazon.com’s equity value at $12.9 billion. During 2004, the
company’s equity value was volatile, trading between $14 billion and $22 billion (in December 2004, Amazon.com was trading near $18 billion).

Exhibit 23.7 Amazon.com: Expected Value

Scenario A
Scenario B
Scenario C
Scenario D

2003 Discounted
cash flow
equity value
($ billion)
21.2
13.5
7.9
2.9

Probability
×
(percent)
20
50
20
10
100
Shares (billion)
Equity share value ($)

Contribution to
equity value
=
($ billion)
4.2
6.8
1.6
0.3
12.9
0.403
31.9

666

VALUING HIGH-GROWTH COMPANIES

Scenario probabilities are unobservable and highly subjective. As a result, the final valuation will be quite sensitive to probability weightings.
Thus, any set of forecasts built on fundamental economic analysis (such as
market size, market share, and competitor margins) should be calibrated
against the historical performance of other high-growth companies. Otherwise, assigning too high a weighting to an implausible scenario could make
the valuation too high (or too low if you are overly conservative).
To further assess which scenario is most plausible, we compare Amazon.com’s recent revenue growth with the historical performance of other
high-growth companies. Earlier in this chapter, we plotted Amazon’s revenue growth versus four other remarkably successful growth companies:
Dell, Home Depot, Microsoft, and Wal-Mart (see Exhibit 23.1). Amazon’s
growth was unparalleled. In the seven years after reaching $150 million in
revenues, Amazon.com grew at nearly twice the speed of other highfliers.
Such growth might lead an observer to believe Amazon.com could easily
reach $50 billion by 2009.
But Exhibit 23.1 is misleading. Once Amazon.com reached $4 billion,
the company’s supernormal revenue growth normalized. Amazon’s revenue growth now tracks that of Home Depot, Microsoft, and Wal-Mart quite
closely, as shown in Exhibit 23.8. Apparently, the growth Amazon.com exhibited during its first few years has been tamed by its large size, and the

Exhibit 23.8 Revenue Growth after Reaching $4 Billion Threshold
(Normalized to Amazon.com)
$ billion
35
Dell
30

Wal-Mart
Home Depot
Microsoft

25
20
15
10
5

Amazon.com

0
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

VALUING AMAZON.COM: THEN AND NOW

667

company now significantly trails Dell’s rate of growth over the same life
cycle period. Based on this simple analysis, any assessments of revenues
growing beyond $30 billion by 2009 are inconsistent with historical evidence. Even to generate $23.5 billion by 2009 (our most optimistic scenario),
Amazon.com must outpace Microsoft, arguably one of the most successful
companies in history. It could happen, but the feat is far from certain.

VALUING AMAZON.COM: THEN AND NOW
In the previous edition of this book (published in early 2000), we applied the preceding techniques to value Amazon.com. At the time, Internet
valuations were at their peak, Amazon.com was growing at 168 percent a
year, and the company was losing nearly $2 million a day. Needless to say,
Amazon.com’s future was unclear, and creating meaningful scenarios was
extremely challenging. Nonetheless, we stepped through a careful analysis
of Amazon’s potential markets, estimated the company’s potential share,
and analyzed the margins for traditional retailers. Exhibit 23.9 summarizes
the forecast scenarios we prepared for the 2000 edition.
A comparison of these numbers with our current set of forecast scenarios in Exhibit 23.6 shows that performance estimates were dramatically
higher in 1999 than the levels we now estimate. At that time, the Internet
was uncharted water and anything seemed possible. Unrealistic assessments were required to justify the marketplace’s exuberant valuations. As
time has passed, however, only the previous edition’s worst scenario has
been consistent with actual performance. Based on these financial results,

Exhibit 23.9 Amazon.com: Scenarios Created in 1999
1999 Probability
(percent)
Scenario A
15 percent market share

5

Scenario B
13 percent market share

35

Scenario C
10 percent market share

35

Scenario D
5 percent market share

25

2010 Revenue
($ billion)

2010 EBITA margin
(percent)
14

85
11

60
8

41

17

Source: Valuation: Measuring and Managing the Value of Companies, 3rd Edition, 2000.

7

668

VALUING HIGH-GROWTH COMPANIES

Exhibit 23.10 Amazon.com: Stock Price Volatility
Monthly volatility, percent
50

40

30

20

10

0
1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

it is not surprising that Internet market capitalizations dropped precipitously in 2001 and 2002.
A second difference between the two valuations comes into view by examining the range of variability across scenarios. In 1999, little historical
data existed for either Amazon.com or the industry as a whole. To capture
this uncertainty, our estimates of projected revenue ranged from $17 billion
to $85 billion, and margins ranged from 7 percent to 14 percent. For our
more recent valuation, we have five additional years of data (more than doubling the number of historical observations), revenue growth rates have declined to traditional levels, and the company is now profitable. Thus,
scenarios can and should be tighter. In our current valuation, revenue estimates range from $14 billion to $23 billion as of 2009, and margins are estimated between 5.2 percent and 8.0 percent.
As a high-growth company begins to stabilize, it should be possible to
tighten the range of potential outcomes. These gains in precision should be
reflected in the stock’s volatility. This has happened to the volatility of
Amazon’s stock price, graphed in Exhibit 23.10. At the time of our initial
valuation, the monthly volatility of Amazon.com was near 40 percent, approximately eight times greater than that of the S&P 500. Over time, as revenues and margins have begun to stabilize, so has the company’s stock
price. In 2004, the monthly volatility of Amazon’s stock price was 12 percent. Although the stock still exhibits more than double the market’s
volatility, this level is much lower than when the stock first traded.

SUMMARY

669

UNCERTAINTY IS HERE TO STAY
By adapting the DCF approach, we can generate reasonable valuations for
seemingly unreasonable businesses. But investors and companies entering
fast-growth markets like those related to the Internet should expect to face
huge uncertainties. To see this, look at what could happen under our four
scenarios to an investor who holds a share of Amazon.com stock for 10 years
after buying it in 2004. To facilitate the calculation, we assume the investor
gradually learns about the most likely scenario.
If Scenario A plays out, the investor will earn a 13 percent annual return,
and as of 2004, the market will seem to have undervalued Amazon.com. An
annual return of 13 percent may not seem very high, but recall that much of
Amazon’s potential success is already incorporated into the company’s stock
price. If Scenario D plays out, the investor will lose about 8 percent a year, and
it will appear that the company was substantially overvalued in 2004. In fact,
our worst scenario forecasted in the 2000 edition has been playing out. An investor who purchased Amazon.com after reading that edition has lost nearly
7 percent annually (31 percent cumulatively). Going forward, these high or
low potential returns should not be interpreted as implying that the current
share price was irrational; they merely reflect uncertainty about the future.
A great deal of this uncertainty is associated with the problem of identifying the eventual winner in a large competitive field: Not even in the
world of high-tech initial public offerings can every company become the
next Microsoft. History shows that a few players will win big, while the vast
majority will toil away amid obscurity and worthless options. It is difficult
to predict which companies will prosper and which will not. Neither investors nor companies can eliminate this uncertainty, and that is why advisors tell investors to diversify their portfolios—and why companies do not
pay cash when acquiring young, high-growth firms.

SUMMARY
The emergence of the Internet and related technologies created impressive
value for select entrepreneurs at the end of the twentieth century. It also
raised questions about the sanity of a stock market that appeared to assign
higher value to companies the more their losses mounted. But as this chapter demonstrates, the DCF approach remains an essential tool for understanding the value of high-growth companies. You must make some
adaptations when valuing these companies: starting from the future rather
than the present when making your forecast, thinking in terms of probabilities, and understanding the economics of the business model compared
with peers. Though you cannot reduce these companies’ volatility, at the
very least you can understand it.

670

VALUING HIGH-GROWTH COMPANIES

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Explain how the process of valuing a high-growth company differs
from valuing an established company? In what way would valuing a
high-growth firm be similar to valuing an established firm that has
recently hired a new chief executive officer?
2. How could scenario analysis be employed to gain a better understanding of the value drivers embedded in a high-growth firm?
3. Identify the key issues an analyst should consider when valuing
start-up companies. How might an analyst resolve these issues?
4. Discuss the similarities and differences of business-to-consumer to
business-to-business valuations in terms of value drivers, controlling
growth, and economic scenarios.

24
Valuing Cyclical Companies
A cyclical company is one whose earnings demonstrate a repeating pattern
of significant increases and decreases. The earnings of such companies, including those in the steel, airline, paper, and chemical industries, fluctuate
because of large changes in the prices of their products. In the airline industry, earnings cyclicality is linked to broader macroeconomic trends. In the
paper industry, cyclicality is largely driven by industry factors, typically related to capacity. Volatile earnings introduce additional complexity into the
valuation of these cyclical companies. For example, historical performance
must be assessed in context of the cycle. A decline in recent performance
does not necessarily indicate a long-term negative trend, but rather a shift
to a different part of the cycle.
In this chapter, we explore the valuation dynamics particular to cyclical
companies. We start with an examination of how the share prices of cyclical
companies behave. This leads to a suggested approach to valuing these companies, as well as possible implications for managers.

SHARE PRICE BEHAVIOR
The share prices of companies with cyclical earnings tend to be more
volatile than those of less cyclical companies. Is this consistent with the
DCF valuation approach? At first glance, theory and reality diverge.

When Theory and Reality Conflict
Let’s explore the theory. Suppose that you were using the DCF approach to
value a cyclical company and you had perfect foresight about the industry
This chapter is partially based on an analysis for a dissertation, “Underestimating Change,”
(Rotterdam: Erasmus University, August 1999), by Marco De Heer, under the supervision of one
of the coauthors.

671

672

VALUING CYCLICAL COMPANIES

Exhibit 24.1 The Long-Term View: Free Cash Flow and DCF Volatility
Free cash flow pattern, Company A ($ million)
1 Period
(years)
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

After-tax operating profit

10

9

6

3

0

(2)

3

18

7

6

10

Net investment

3

3

2

2

1

3

5

3

3

3

3

Free cash flow

7

6

4

1

(1)

(5)

(3)

15

4

3

7

34

33

Cash flows valued from any one year forward
27
28
30
35
40
33
33

34

31

2 DCF value

3 Free cash flow and DCF value patterns
250
200

Index

150
DCF value
100
50
Free cash flow
0
–50
–100

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Period (years)

cycle. Would the company’s value and earnings behave similarly? No, the
DCF value would exhibit much lower volatility than the earnings or cash
flows. DCF reduces future expected cash flows to a single value. As a
result, any single year is unimportant. For a cyclical company, the high cash
flows cancel out the low cash flows. Only the long-term trend really matters.
An example can clarify. The business cycle of Company A is 10 years.
Exhibit 24.1, Part 1, shows the company’s hypothetical cash flow pattern. It
is highly volatile, containing both positive and negative cash flows. Discounting the future free cash flows at 10 percent produces the succession of
DCF values in Exhibit 24.1, Part 2.
Exhibit 24.1, Part 3, compares the cash flows and DCF values (the values
are indexed for comparability). It shows that the DCF value is far less
volatile than the underlying cash flow. In fact, the value displays almost no
volatility because no single year’s performance has a significant impact on
the value of the company.
In the real world, the share prices of cyclical companies are less stable.
Exhibit 24.2 shows the earnings and share values (indexed) for 15 companies with a four-year cycle. The share prices are more volatile than the
DCF approach would predict—suggesting that theory and reality conflict.

SHARE PRICE BEHAVIOR

673

Exhibit 24.2 Share Prices and EPS for 15 Cyclical Companies
2.5
2.0
Share price
EPS

1.5

Index

1.0
0.5
0
–0.5
–1.0

+2
gh
Tr
ou

Tr
ou

gh

+1

gh
Tr
ou

+2
k
Pe
a

+1
Pe
a

k

k
Pe
a

–1
k
Pe
a

k
Pe
a

–2

k
Pe
a

–3

–1.5

Are Earnings Forecasts the Culprit?
How can we reconcile this divergence? We examined equity analysts’ consensus earnings forecasts for cyclical companies to see if they provided any
clues to the volatile stock prices of these companies.
What we found surprised us. Consensus earnings forecasts for cyclical
companies appeared to ignore cyclicality entirely. The forecasts invariably
showed an upward-sloping trend, whether the companies were at the peak
or trough of the cycle. What appeared was not that the DCF model was inconsistent with the facts, but that the earnings and cash flow projections
of the market (assuming the market followed the analysts’ consensus)
were to blame.
The conclusion was based on an analysis of 36 U.S. cyclical companies
during 1985 to 1997. We divided them into groups with similar cycles (e.g.,
three, four, or five years from peak to trough) and calculated scaled average
earnings and earnings forecasts. We then compared actual earnings with
consensus earnings forecasts over the cycle.1
Exhibit 24.3 on page 674 plots the actual earnings and consensus earnings forecasts for the set of 15 companies with four-year cycles in primary
metals and manufacturing transportation equipment. The consensus forecasts do not predict the earnings cycle at all. In fact, except for the “next-year
1

Note that we have already adjusted downward the normal positive bias of analyst forecasts to
focus on just the cyclicality issue. V. K. Chopra, “ Why So Much Error in Analysts’ Earnings
Forecasts?” Financial Analysts Journal (November/December 1998): 35 – 42.

674

VALUING CYCLICAL COMPANIES

Exhibit 24.3 Actual EPS and Consensus EPS Forecasts for 15
Cyclical Companies
Actual EPS
Forecasted EPS
1.5

1.2

0.9

0.6

0.3

0

–0.3

+6
gh

Tr
ou

gh

+5

+4
Tr
ou

gh

+3
Tr
ou

gh

+2
gh

Tr
ou

+1
Tr
ou

gh

gh
Tr
ou

Tr
ou

+2
k

+1
Pe
a

k

k
Pe
a

Pe
a

–1
k
Pe
a

–2
k
Pe
a

–3
k
Pe
a

Pe
a

k

–4

–0.6

forecasts” in the years following the trough, the earnings per share are forecast to follow an upward-sloping path with no future variation. You might
say that the forecast does not even acknowledge the existence of a cycle.2
One explanation could be that equity analysts have incentives to avoid
predicting the earnings cycle, particularly the down part. Academic research has shown that earnings forecasts have a general positive bias that
is sometimes attributed to the incentives facing equity analysts at investment banks.3
Pessimistic earnings forecasts may damage relations between an analyst’s employer—an investment bank—and a particular company. In addition, companies that are the target of negative commentary might cut off an
analyst’s access to management. From this evidence, we could conclude that
2

Similar results were found for companies with three- and five-year cycles.
The following articles discuss this hypothesis: M. R. Clayman and R. A. Schwartz, “Falling in
Love Again—Analysts’ Estimates and Reality,” Financial Analysts Journal (September/October
1994): 66 –68; J. Francis, and D. Philbrick, “Analysts’ Decisions as Products of a Multi-Task Environment,” Journal of Accounting Research, 31(2) (Autumn 1993): 216 –230; K. Schipper, “Commentary on Analysts’ Forecasts,” Accounting Horizons (December 1991): 105 –121; B. Trueman,
“On the Incentives for Security Analysts to Revise Their Earnings Forecasts,” Contemporary Accounting Research, 7(1): 203 –222.
3

SHARE PRICE BEHAVIOR

675

analysts as a group are unable or unwilling to predict the cycle for these
companies. If the market followed analyst forecasts, that behavior could account for the high volatility of cyclical companies’ share prices.

The Market Appears Smarter Than the Consensus Forecast
We know that cycles are hard to predict, particularly their inflection points.
So it is not surprising that the market does not get it exactly right. However,
we would be disappointed if the stock market entirely missed the cycle as
the consensus earnings analysis suggests. To address this issue, we returned to the question of how the market should behave. Should it be able to
predict the cycle and therefore exhibit little share price volatility? That
would probably be asking too much. At any point, the company or industry
could break out of its cycle and move to one that is higher or lower, as illustrated in Exhibit 24.4.
Suppose you are valuing a company that seems to be at a peak in its
earnings cycle. Based on past cycles, you expect the industry to turn down
soon. However, there are signs that the industry is about to break out of the
old cycle. A reasonable valuation approach would be to build two scenarios
and weight their values. Suppose you assumed, with a 50 percent probability, that the cycle will follow the past and that the industry will turn down
in the next year or so. The second scenario, also with 50 percent probability,

Exhibit 24.4 When the Cycle Changes

New trend
established
New trend

Earnings

Cycle returns

Old trend

Today

676

VALUING CYCLICAL COMPANIES

Exhibit 24.5 Market Values of Cyclical Companies Less
Volatile Than Zero Foresight Forecast
2.5
Zero
foresight
2.0
50/50
Actual
share
price

1.5
Index

Perfect
foresight
1.0

0.5

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

would be that the industry will break out of the cycle and follow a new longterm trend based on current improved performance. The value of the company would then be the weighted average of these two values.
We found evidence that this is in fact the way the market behaves. We
valued the four-year cyclical companies three ways:
1. With perfect foresight about the upcoming cycle
2. With zero foresight, assuming that current performance represents
a point on a new long-term trend (essentially the consensus earnings forecast)
3. Fifty percent of perfect foresight and fifty percent of zero foresight
Exhibit 24.5 summarizes the results. As shown, the market does not follow either the perfect-foresight or the zero-foresight path; it follows a
blended path, much closer to the 50/50 path. So the market has neither perfect foresight nor zero foresight. One could argue that this 50/50 valuation
is the right place for the market to be.

APPROACH TO VALUING CYCLICAL COMPANIES
No one can precisely predict the earnings cycle for an industry, and any single forecast of performance must be wrong. Managers and investors can

IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGING CYCLICAL COMPANIES

677

benefit from following explicitly the multiple-scenario probabilistic approach to valuing cyclical companies outlined earlier, similar to the approach we used in the Heineken case in Chapter 11 and the high-growth
company valuation in Chapter 23. The probabilistic approach avoids the
traps of a single forecast and allows the exploration of a wider range of outcomes and their implications.
Here is a two-scenario approach for valuing cyclical companies (of
course, you could always have more than two scenarios):
1. Construct and value the “normal cycle” scenario, using information
about past cycles. Pay particular attention to the long-term trend
lines of operating profits, cash flow, and ROIC because they will
have the largest impact on the valuation. Make sure the continuing
value is based on a normalized level of profits (i.e., a point on the
company’s long-term cash flow trend line), not a peak or trough.
2. Construct and value a new trend-line scenario based on the recent
performance of the company. Once again, focus primarily on the
long-term trend line, because it will have the largest impact on value.
Do not worry too much about modeling future cyclicality (although
future cyclicality will be important for financial solvency).
3. Develop the economic rationale for each of the two scenarios, considering factors such as demand growth, companies entering or exiting
the industry, and technology changes that will affect the supply and
demand balance.
4. Assign probabilities to the scenarios, and calculate a weighted value
of the scenarios. Use the economic rationale and its likelihood to estimate the weights assigned to each scenario.
This approach provides an estimate of the value as well as scenarios
that put boundaries on the valuation. Managers can use these boundaries
to improve their strategy and respond to signals about which scenario is
likely to occur.

IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGING CYCLICAL COMPANIES
Is there anything managers can do to reduce or take advantage of the cyclicality of their industry? Evidence suggests that, in many cyclical industries,
the companies themselves are what drives cyclicality. Exhibit 24.6 on page
678 shows the return on capital and net investment in commodity chemicals from 1980 to 2001. The chart shows that, collectively, commodity chemical companies invest large amounts when prices and returns are high.
Since capacity comes on line in very large chunks, however, utilization

678

VALUING CYCLICAL COMPANIES

Exhibit 24.6: ROIC and Investment Rate in Commodity
Chemicals 1980–2001
North American Medians, percent
2 years

2 years

30%

20%

10%
ROIC
0%

Net investment rate¹
–10%
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

1
Change in Property, Plant, and Equipment (PPE) adjusted for inflation.
Source: McKinsey chemicals database (CLTPD).

plunges, and this places downward pressure on prices and returns on capital. The cyclical investment in capacity is the driver of the cyclical profitability. Fluctuations in demand from customers do not cause cyclicality in
profits. Producer supply does.
Managers who have detailed information about their product markets
should be able to do a better job than the financial market in figuring out
the cycle and then take appropriate actions. We can only speculate why they
do not do so. Still, based on conversations with these executives, we believe
that the herding behavior is caused by three factors: First, it is easier to invest when prices are high because that is when cash is available. Second, it is
easier to get approval from boards of directors to invest when profits are
high. Finally, executives are concerned about their rivals growing faster
than themselves (investments are a way to maintain market share).
This behavior also sends confusing signals to the stock market. Expanding when prices are high tells the financial market that the future looks
great (often just before the cycle turns down). Signaling pessimism just before an upturn also confuses the market. Perhaps it should be no surprise
that the stock market has difficulty valuing cyclical companies.
How could managers exploit their superior knowledge of the cycle? The
most obvious action would be to time capital spending better. Companies
could also pursue financial strategies, such as issuing shares at the peak of
the cycle or repurchasing shares at the cycle’s trough. The most aggressive
managers could take this one step further by adopting a trading approach,

REVIEW QUESTIONS

679

Exhibit 24.7 Relative Returns from Capital Expenditure Timing
Internal rate of return, percent
Typical spending pattern
Spending evenly over cycle
Optimally timed capital spending
Optimally timed asset purchases

4
5
9
34

making acquisitions at the bottom of the cycle and selling assets at the top.
Exhibit 24.7 shows the results of a simulation of optimal cycle timing. The
typical company’s returns on investment could increase substantially.
Can companies really behave this way and invest against the cycle? It is
actually very difficult for a company to take the contrarian view. The CEO
must convince the board and the company’s bankers to expand when the industry outlook is gloomy and competitors are retrenching. In addition, the
CEO has to hold back while competitors build at the top of the cycle. Breaking out of the cycle may be possible, but it is the rare CEO who can do it.

SUMMARY
At first glance, the share prices of cyclical companies appear too volatile to
be consistent with the DCF valuation approach. In this chapter, however, we
have seen that share price volatility can be explained by the uncertainty
surrounding the industry cycle. Using scenarios and probabilities, managers and investors can take a systematic DCF approach to valuing and analyzing cyclical companies.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What are the characteristics of a cyclical company? How does the valuation of a cyclical company differ from the valuation of a noncyclical company? Compare and contrast the differences of evaluating
firms in the electric generation industry compared to firms in the automotive manufacturing industry.
2. Why should a manager apply a multi-scenario approach to value cyclical companies as opposed to the single-forecast approach normally associated with enterprise DCF and economic profit valuation models?

680

VALUING CYCLICAL COMPANIES

3. Create a portfolio of five comparable companies in an industry that is
cyclical. Gather up to 10 years of financial and operating data for the
firms in the portfolio. Also gather underlying commodity price, production index, supply and demand market information for the comparable companies’ industry. Use this data to:
a. Develop a value tree that explains return on invested capital down
to the profit margin layer of analysis for each year.
b. Analyze the industry trend and deviations exhibited in this
portfolio.
c. Analyze movements in underlying commodity prices and
production.
d. Correlate industry value driver movements with underlying industry supply and demand dynamics.
4. Collect monthly share prices for the portfolio and use this data to:
a. Create an equity book value weighted index of value and analyze
the cyclical character of the share prices.
b. Correlate the value tree movements year-to-year to the cyclical dynamics of the underlying industry.
c. Develop three potential scenarios along which cyclical factors
change over a short-term forecasting horizon.
d. Develop three potential scenarios to extrapolate the movement of
cyclical factors in the long term.

25
Valuing Financial
Institutions
In this chapter we provide an overview of valuing financial institutions—
banks and insurance companies. These are some of the most complex companies to value, especially from the outside in. Outside analysts always lack
some critical information about these companies’ economics (such as assetliability mismatch and credit losses for banks), so they must rely on rough
estimates and judgment about the accuracy of management’s accounting
decisions. Moreover, due to the nature of their operating model, these companies are highly levered. That makes valuations extremely sensitive to
even small changes in key drivers.
We will highlight some of the primary issues you may encounter when
valuing financial institutions. Our basic approach to valuing industrial companies, described earlier in this book, will serve as a foundation from which
we can focus on areas where the valuation process for financial companies
differs. First we describe why you should use the equity cash flow approach
for valuing these companies. Then we provide details on how to put this approach into practice. Finally we discuss, in turn, specific issues relating to
banks and insurance companies, including some of the methods and metrics
that internal analysts use to better assess their performance and value.

EQUITY CASH FLOW APPROACH
Throughout most of this book, we detail the enterprise DCF approach to
valuation, which we use for nonfinancial companies in cases where operating decisions and financing decisions are separate. For financial companies,
Special thanks to Susan Nolen Foushee who cowrote this chapter.

681

682

VALUING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

however, we cannot value operations separately from interest income and
expense, since these are important components of their income. Another
distinction involves our concept of invested capital, which focuses on a company’s operating assets and is indifferent, within bounds, to how those assets are financed. However, financing decisions (the choice of leverage, for
example) are at the core of how banks and insurers generate earnings.
Therefore, to value financial institutions you should use the equity cash
flow method rather than the enterprise DCF method. (See Chapter 5 for a
comparison of these methods.)

Calculating Equity Cash Flow
We can derive equity cash flow from two starting points. First, equity cash
flow is driven by net income minus the earnings retained in the business:
Equity Cash Flow = Net Income − Increase in Equity + Other Comprehensive Income

(Net income itself is driven by the revenues and expenses of the company;
in the following sections on banks and insurers, we discuss these items in
more detail.)
We start with net income because it represents the earnings theoretically
available to shareholders after the company has paid all expenses, including
those to debt holders. However, net income by itself is not cash flow. As a financial institution grows, it will need to increase its equity; otherwise, its
debt/equity ratio would rise, which might cause regulators and customers
to worry about the company’s solvency. Increases in equity reduce equity
cash flow, because they mean the company is setting aside earnings that
could otherwise be paid out to shareholders. Finally, we add back other comprehensive income, which under U.S. GAAP consists of several noncash
items that are added to or subtracted from the equity account.1 Adjusting for
other comprehensive income cancels out this noncash adjustment to equity.
Another way to calculate equity cash flow is as the sum of all cash paid
to or received from shareholders, including dividends, share repurchases,
and new share issuances. Exhibit 25.1 shows a sample equity cash flow calculation for a bank. We calculate equity cash flow according to the previous
formula, and then cross-check our result by summing all the various payments made to or by holders of common and preferred shares. Both calculations arrive at the same result.
In addition to these two relatively simple approaches, you can calculate
equity cash flow from the changes in all the balance sheet accounts. For example, equity cash flow for a bank equals net income plus the increase in
1

The main items included in “other comprehensive income” are net unrealized gains and losses
on certain equity and debt invest ments, net unrealized gains and losses on hedging activities,
adjust ments to the minimum pension liability, and foreign-currency translation items.

EQUITY CASH FLOW APPROACH

683

Exhibit 25.1 ABC Bank: Equity Cash Flow
$ million
Equity cash flow
Net income
Other comprehensive income
Increase in equity
Equity cash flow

2002
1,678
66
(913)
831

2003
1,823
(11)
(1,221)
592

Check of equity cash flow
Net buyback (issuance) of common stock
Net buyback (issuance) of preferred stock
Common dividends
Other changes in equity
Equity cash flow

249
(61)
551
92
831

(77)
(44)
744
(30)
592

deposits and reserves, less the increase in loans and investments, and so on.
The result will be identical to the two simpler approaches, and it highlights
changes in the company’s asset or liability composition.
People often equate the equity cash flow method with discounting dividends. In a simplified world, dividends are indeed the same as equity cash
flow. However, real-world companies are generally more complex. In the
example shown in Exhibit 25.1 dividends are the largest component of cash
flow. But other items, such as share buybacks and issuances, still have a material impact.

Understanding a Company’s Equity Needs
Forecasting future equity cash flows is more complex than the historical calculation discussed earlier. The reason is that as a financial institution grows
and increases its net income, it will need to increase its equity. But how
much equity will it need? In this area our perspective may differ, depending
on whether you are doing a valuation inside or outside the institution.
The crux of the issue is this: Financial institutions are highly levered because of the nature of their business—taking money from depositors or
policyholders, then lending it out and/or placing it into investments. Fundamentally, much of these institutions’ business involves risking other people’s money. Regulators (and prudent managers) will want to make sure
that the company also puts some of its owners’ money at risk by financing
some of its activities with equity, and that companies do not achieve high
returns simply by operating at unsustainably high levels of leverage.

Risk capital versus book equity From the perspective of regulators and
risk management, the amount of equity a financial institution should have

684

VALUING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

depends on the risks in its portfolio. The 1988 Basel I accord established
rules for banks regarding how much capital they must hold based on their
level of risk-weighted assets (RWAs). These RWAs were defined as a bank’s
loan portfolio weighted by the riskiness of different classes of borrowers.
The same accord also specified how much of the capital had to consist of
straightforward shareholders’ equity, and how much could consist of other
forms of financing, such as complex subordinated debt instruments. More
recently, the Basel II accords (already adopted in Europe and under process
of adoption in the United States) provide banks more flexibility in using internal risk models to assess their capital needs. However, Basel II maintains
the general principle that capital should be related to risk (and may lead to
major revisions of capital needs per product type). Similarly, insurers operate under national regulations regarding solvency that seek to make sure
they have enough capital to meet their risks.
Banks and insurers make internal calculations of the risk capital required to operate prudently. (Note that the amount of risk capital a financial institution believes it needs to hold may be less than that required by
regulators and, indeed, less than the total equity on its books.) In this
context, when you analyze financial institutions, you will often hear term
like RAROC (risk-adjusted return on capital) or RORAC (return on riskadjusted capital). These concepts are used in most modern performance
management systems to evaluate the economic performance of business
units within a bank or insurance company.
From an external perspective, we are unlikely to know a financial institution’s risk capital per business unit. Indeed, we may not know whether a
bank or insurer overall has excess (or insufficient) risk capital. Therefore,
when valuing an entire bank or insurance company from the outside in, we
make the assumption that the amount of risk capital employed by the company is essentially equal to the book value of its equity.

Forecasting equity cash flows When we use book equity, how do we
forecast how much equity a company will need? For industrial companies,
the key drivers of value are growth and return on capital (relative to the
cost of capital). For financial companies, the key drivers are growth and
return on equity. At a high level, we can say that growth and ROE drive
equity cash flow.
To forecast equity cash flow, begin by forecasting the company’s income
statement and balance sheet. We typically forecast equity in relation to
other balance sheet items, such as total assets. The equity cash flow then
flows from these statements. (You can either explicitly estimate the dividends as part of this forecast or simply forecast overall equity cash flow.)
This approach ensures that you understand how the income statement, balance sheet, cash flows, and return on equity interact and drive the value of
the company. If you make an explicit forecast of dividends and then solve

EQUITY CASH FLOW APPROACH

685

Exhibit 25.2 ABC Bank: Check of Equity Cash Flow
$ million
Net income
Other comprehensive income

1,678
66

1,823
(11)

Change in assets
Cash
Federal funds/repos
Investments
Net loans
Property, plant and equipment
Goodwill
Other assets

(251)
(189)
(3,032)
(5,859)
(41)
(66)
(2,805)

669
126
4,791
(17,801)
45
(182)
999

Total change in assets

(12,244)

(11,353)

Change in liabilities
Deposits
Short-term debt
Other liabilities
Long-term debt

8,721
(1,275)
584
3,301

9,003
(2,584)
(1,087)
4,801

Total change in liabilities
Equity cash flow

11,330
831

10,133
592

for the rest of the balance sheet, you may inadvertently change the company’s capital structure, leading to excess capital or excessive leverage.
From a pure accounting perspective, you can calculate changes in equity by considering overall changes in the balance sheet. In the course of its
operations, a financial institution will increase or decrease both its assets
and its liabilities. For example, a bank’s loans, securities holdings, deposits,
and debt will all change over the course of a year. Because the balance sheet
must balance, you can infer the changes in equity from the changes in assets and liabilities. By itself this perspective is not particularly insightful,
but it is useful as a check when you build cash flow forecasts. Exhibit 25.2
provides an example using the same financials as the previous exhibit.

Accounting issues that may affect your calculations Goodwill is an important accounting issue in the valuation of financial institutions. Just as
with industrial companies, calculate ROE before and after goodwill to understand the underlying economics of the company versus its performance
as an acquirer. To estimate ROE without goodwill, add any goodwill amortization to net income for the numerator. Subtract goodwill from equity for
the denominator. Exhibit 25.3 on page 686 shows how great an impact goodwill can have on ROE. Insurer A buys Insurer B for a $7.5 billion premium

686

VALUING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

Exhibit 25.3 Impact of Goodwill on ROE
$ million, percent

Net income

Insurer A Insurer B
519
627

Acquisition
Interim
impact pro forma
–
1,145

Tangible assets
Goodwill
Total assets

6,878
2,455
9,333

8,498
2,193
10,691

–
7,513
7,513

15,376
12,161
27,538

Miscellaneous liabilities
Debt
Equity
Total liabilities and equity

3,960
1,115
4,258
9,333

5,876
830
3,985
10,691

–
–
7,513
7,513

9,836
1,945
15,757
27,538

Equity excluding goodwill

1,803

1,792

3,595

RoE including goodwill

12%

16%

7%

RoE excluding goodwill

29%

35%

32%

over book value. With goodwill, the combined company’s ROE is only 7 percent. Without goodwill, its ROE is 32 percent. Both perspectives are useful:
The ROE without goodwill is a better indicator of the likely incremental
ROE that will drive the insurer’s equity cash flow and value. The ROE with
goodwill indicates how much the acquiring insurer’s performance must improve to compensate for the acquisition premium.
Stock options may be an important issue as well, as they may affect both
the company’s margin and its overall valuation. As we explained in Part
Two, you should adjust a company’s expenses to reflect the cost of issuing
employee stock options if the company does not explicitly do so already.
You should also add the value of current and forecasted future stock options to the firm’s overall equity value.
You may need to make other adjustments to ROE, including adjustments
for pension accounting. While these adjustments will not affect cash flow,
they may provide insights into the underlying economics of the business.

Other Issues in the Equity Cash Flow Method
When using the equity cash flow method, you also need to modify the
continuing-value formula and the estimation of economic profit. In doing so,
remember to use the cost of equity instead of the overall weighted average cost
of capital. For continuing value, we recommend using a value driver formula:

EQUITY CASH FLOW APPROACH

CV =

where

687

g 

NI ×  1 −


RONE 
( ke − g )

CV = Continuing value
NI = Net income in the first year after the explicit forecast ends
g = Net income growth in the continuing-value period
RONE = Incremental return on new equity in the continuingvalue period
ke = Cost of equity

This formula is analogous to the value driver formula used in Chapter 9 on
continuing value.
Keep in mind two important considerations when you apply this formula. First you should adjust net income by adding back goodwill
amortization (similar to the way NOPLAT is calculated before goodwill
amortization). Second you should compare the return on incremental equity for the continuing value with ROE before goodwill. In other words, if
you believe that the return on incremental equity should equal the ROE in
the explicit forecast period, use the ROE before goodwill as a proxy for the
bank’s underlying economics.
For guidance on calculating the cost of equity, see Chapter 10 on the cost
of capital. We do not recommend adjusting betas for different leverage levels
for financial institutions.2
As with industrial companies, we can make good use of an economic
profit calculation to understand whether a financial institution is creating
or destroying value in any given year. We can calculate it in two ways:
Economic Profit = Equity × (ROE − ke )

or
Economic Profit = Net Income − (Equity × ke )

Just as you can value a nonfinancial company by discounting economic
profit, you can also value a financial institution by discounting its economic
profit, using (and discounting back) an appropriate continuing-value formula, and adding the starting equity.
2
Unpublished research by McKinsey & Company also suggests that, in fact, banks’ assetliability mismatch, more than their leverage, affects the volatility of their returns.

688

VALUING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

SPECIFIC ISSUES IN VALUING BANKS
When you apply the equity cash flow approach to valuing banks, there are
several issues to watch out for. This section describes some basic aspects
of bank economics, discusses issues encountered in valuing banks either
outside-in or inside-out, and provides an example of a bank valuation.

Basic Bank Economics
Banks make money in several ways, including lending activities and fees for
services rendered. The most important income categories are net interest
income and fee (or noninterest) income.
Net interest income is the difference between the interest income a bank
earns from lending and the interest expense it pays to borrow funds. This
seemingly straightforward item actually contains two separate components: One is a true customer spread—lending out funds at a higher rate of
interest than the bank pays—which is value-creating. The other component
is maturity mismatch income, which arises when a bank’s assets have a different duration than its liabilities have, and the bank earns a spread from
being on different parts of the yield curve. Mismatch profits are difficult to
sustain and are typically not value-creating when the risk of taking positions on their yield curve is taken into account. (With perfect information,
you would remove mismatch profits from forecasts of net interest income,
but this information is difficult to obtain.)
Often analysts will speak of the “income” or the “spread” model for calculating net interest income. The two methods are actually equivalent. The
income method (shown in Exhibit 25.4, for a hypothetical bank) subtracts
interest expense from interest income, then subtracts other expenses and

Exhibit 25.4 XYZ Bank: Income Model
$ million
Balance sheet
Assets
Cash
Loans
Total assets

Income statement
120
933
1,053

Liabilities
Deposits
Equity
Total liabilities and equities

1,000
53
1,053

Interest income (12% × 933)
Interest expense (5% × $1,000)
Other expenses
Net profit before tax
Taxes at 40 percent
Net income

112
(50)
(48)
14
(6)
8

SPECIFIC ISSUES IN VALUING BANKS

689

Exhibit 25.5 XYZ Bank: Spread Model
$ million
Definition
(Spread on loans) × (loan balance)
+ (Spread on deposits) × (deposit balance)
+ (Equity credit rate) × (equity)
– (Opportunity cost) × (cash)
– Expenses
= Net profit before tax
– Taxes at 40%
Net income

Calculation
(12% – 8%) × ($933)
+ (8% – 5%) × ($1,000)
+ (8%) × ($53)
– (8%) × ($120)

37
30
4
(10)
(48)
14
(6)
8

taxes as well and arrives at net income of $8 million. The spread method (in
Exhibit 25.5) arrives at the same answer but along the way shows where the
bank earns its profits (lending versus deposit taking). In this example, assume that the funds provided by the deposit-taking activities of the bank
(which pays customers 5 percent) are lent to the wholesale bank at an opportunity cost of 8 percent; the wholesale bank then lends them to customers at an external rate of 12 percent. The bank earns a spread of 4
percent on its loans, generating $37 million of income. It earns a spread of 3
percent on its deposits for $30 million of income. However, its nonearning
cash held as a cushion against risk has an opportunity cost of $10 million.
Finally, its equity balance doesn’t have any accounting cost (though it does
have an opportunity cost), generating $4 million of income. After we deduct
operating expenses, net income is $8 million, the same as with the income
method. The income method is easier to use outside-in, while the spread
method can be helpful for determining true value creation by different
parts of the bank.
Fee income is revenue from services provided to customers, whether in
retail banking, private banking services, M&A, or asset management. Fee
income is usually easier to understand than net interest income, as it is financing independent.
Banks may also derive income from other financial activities, such as
proprietary trading or taking capital gains on their securities portfolio.
These sources of income are often highly volatile.
On the cost side, two cost categories are significant. One major cost is
the provision for loan losses. Clearly, an important value driver for any
bank is how many of its loans are repaid on a timely basis. However, it is difficult for an outsider to really understand the quality of a bank’s loan portfolio; at best you can only make estimates of future loan losses. The other
major cost category is noninterest expenses, which include selling, general,

690

VALUING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

and administrative expenses. These costs are typically easier to understand
and forecast from the outside in.
On the balance sheet, banks’ major assets are typically their loan portfolio and their portfolio of securities and cash. Usually, fixed assets and
working capital are only a small portion of the balance sheet total. The
major liabilities are usually deposits, debt, and equities.

Valuing Banks from the Outside In
In building a cash flow model of a bank from the outside in, we must make
several simplifications. We cannot truly understand the contribution of mismatch profits to overall net interest income, the quality of the loan portfolio, or whether the company has excess equity. However, given these
shortcomings, we can still use an equity cash flow model to understand a
company’s economics and prospects.
We have created a disguised example based on a major U.S. retail bank,
which we’ll call Big Bank. Our goal is to illustrate the various steps in the
estimation of a bank’s value, not to create a highly detailed forecast (although our model does closely approximate the market capitalization of Big
Bank as of the time of writing). We have created a full income statement and
balance sheet, along with an abbreviated schedule of changes in shareholders’ equity, which then lead to the equity cash flow. We have also used publicly available Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) information
about risk-weighted assets and Tier 1 capital (equity and other capital that
provides the most cushion for depositors and creditors) so that we can incorporate some estimates of capital adequacy.
Looking at Big Bank’s historical performance, we see that over the past
several years it has generally done well. Revenues increased by 16 percent
and net income grew by 35 percent per year from 2001 to 2003. Expense control may be an issue, as the efficiency ratio (the ratio of noninterest expense
to total revenue) has risen over the past few years from 58 percent to 60 percent. Nonetheless, Big Bank has been creating value vigorously; its return
on equity (including goodwill) in 2003 was 19 percent, well above its 8.4
percent cost of equity. Its ROE, excluding goodwill, was even higher, at 28
percent. (Our hypothesis is that Big Bank is holding little, if any, excess risk
capital, so we believe these ROE numbers are an accurate reflection of the
bank’s underlying operating performance.)
Exhibits 25.6 to 25.8 provide our forecast for Big Bank. On a high level,
our approach is as follows:
• For income statement items (see Exhibit 25.6), we estimate interest
income and interest expense by forecasting margins on future
amounts of loans and deposits. We also forecast future levels of loan

691

$ million

6,016 6,354 7,249
(719)
(20)
35
5,297 6,334 7,284
(8,114)
3,212
(1,205)
2,007
(8)
1,999

(1,006) (1,102) (1,486) (2,445) (3,180) (3,288) (3,396) (3,508) (3,624) (3,744) (3,868) (3,996) (4,129) (4,267)
12,342 14,853 16,700 16,787 17,356 17,953 18,554 19,179 19,824 20,494 21,186 21,904 22,647 23,417

Fee income
Capital gains (losses)
Total noninterest income

Total noninterest expense
Net income before income taxes
Income taxes
Net income before preferred dividends
Preferred dividends
Net income applicable to common stock

Dividends paid to common stock

Memo: total revenue

(8,654) (10,112) (10,165) (10,509) (10,871) (11,234) (11,613) (12,004) (12,409) (12,829) (13,263) (13,713) (14,179)
5,209 5,575 5,510 5,697 5,893 6,089 6,293 6,504 6,723 6,949 7,184 7,426 7,678
(1,849) (1,926) (1,929) (1,994) (2,062) (2,131) (2,203) (2,277) (2,353) (2,432) (2,514) (2,599) (2,687)
3,359 3,648 3,582 3,703 3,830 3,958 4,091 4,228 4,370 4,517 4,669 4,827 4,990
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
3,357 3,647 3,580 3,701 3,829 3,956 4,089 4,226 4,368 4,515 4,668 4,825 4,989

7,503 7,765 8,037 8,318 8,609 8,911 9,223 9,545 9,879 10,225 10,583
7,503 7,765 8,037 8,318 8,609 8,911 9,223 9,545 9,879 10,225 10,583

(2,090) (1,129) (949) (1,150) (1,196) (1,244) (1,294) (1,346) (1,399) (1,455) (1,514) (1,574) (1,637) (1,703)
(749) (315) (189) (140) (184) (190) (197) (203) (210) (218) (225) (233) (241) (249)
(1,126) (895) (868) (1,100) (1,100) (1,133) (1,184) (1,234) (1,287) (1,342) (1,398) (1,457) (1,518) (1,581)
(3,965) (2,339) (2,006) (2,390) (2,481) (2,568) (2,674) (2,783) (2,897) (3,015) (3,137) (3,264) (3,396) (3,533)
7,045 8,519 9,416 9,285 9,591 9,916 10,236 10,569 10,914 11,271 11,641 12,025 12,422 12,834
(1,016) (991) (1,013) (1,112) (1,150) (1,189) (1,230) (1,272) (1,316) (1,361) (1,409) (1,457) (1,508) (1,560)
6,029 7,529 8,403 8,172 8,441 8,726 9,005 9,297 9,597 9,910 10,233 10,568 10,914 11,274

Interest on deposits
Interest on short-term borrowings
Interest on long-term debt
Total interest expense
Net interest income
Provision for loan losses
Net interest income after provision
for loan losses

Interest on loans
Interest on investments held for sale
Other interest income
Total interest income

Historical
2014
Forecast
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
(CV)
8,222 7,674 8,198 8,453 8,741 9,039 9,349 9,670 10,002 10,347 10,704 11,075 11,459 11,858
2,621 3,015 3,061 3,054 3,158 3,265 3,377 3,493 3,613 3,738 3,867 4,001 4,140 4,284
167
184
169
190
164
226
195
168
201
173
207
179
213
220
11,010 10,858 11,422 11,675 12,072 12,483 12,910 13,352 13,811 14,286 14,778 15,289 15,818 16,367

Exhibit 25.6 Big Bank: Historical and Forecast Income Statement

692

VALUING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

loss provisions, non-interest expense, and income taxes on a percentage basis (of loans, revenues, and pretax income, respectively). We
forecast future capital gains—which relate to the bank’s relatively
small trading portfolio of securities held for sale—at zero, because
they are immaterial. If the bank relied on its trading portfolio for a
significant portion of income, we would need to estimate the returns
on its trading activities.
• On the balance sheet (see Exhibit 25.7), we use our forecast of deposit
growth as a driver; then we forecast the ratio of loans to deposits
based on historical performance. We then relate other accounts on
the asset side of the balance sheet (except excess cash) to either loans
or deposits.
• On the liability side, we forecast a stable capital structure, so we have
chosen to forecast the required level of equity each year through a
rough estimate of the ratio of risk-weighted assets to Tier 1 capital
(using numbers from the FDIC), as detailed in Exhibit 25.8 on page
694. Going forward, using the historical ratio of risk-weighted assets
to total loans, we forecast the amount of risk-weighted assets. We
then set the ratio of Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets at 8 percent
(the regulatory minimum) to derive the needed amount of Tier 1
capital. Adding goodwill to the required Tier 1 capital then gives us
the required amount of total shareholders’ equity. We balance each
year’s statement of changes in equity by adjusting payouts to or from
shareholders, in the form of dividends, share buybacks, or share issuances. Given the level of equity and assets for each year, we can
balance the balance sheet each year either by adding debt or by
adding excess cash.
• To check on how plausible our forecasts are, we calculate a number of
output ratios, shown in Exhibit 25.9 on page 695. These include
growth in revenues and net income, ratios between different balance
sheet items, and returns on assets and equity. For example, in this
particular model the forecast for ROE including goodwill is 17 percent
to 18 percent, and ROE excluding goodwill is about 24 percent, which
is in line with recent past performance. Revenues and net income
grow at 3.4 percent, which is lower than some previous years’ performance but in line with our hypothesis that Big Bank’s organic growth
will lag nominal GDP growth of 4.5 percent to 5.0 percent.
• To complete the valuation, as shown in Exhibit 25.10 on page 696, we
compute equity cash flows and a continuing value using the formula
described earlier in this chapter. Then, using our CAPM-derived cost
of equity of 8.4 percent, we discount the cash flows and the continuing value to arrive at an equity value for the company.

693

11,014
390
1,936
50,892
11,389
2,002
52,626

11,778
2,071
54,424

2006
12,181
2,142
56,287

2007
12,599
2,215
58,218

2008
13,033
2,291
60,220

2009
13,482
2,370
62,296

2010
13,948
2,452
64,448

2011
14,431
2,537
66,679

2012

14,931
2,625
68,993

2013

15,450
2,716
71,392

2014

148
1,702
5,587
11,385
(1,450)
574
(112)
17,835

19,674
10,771
29,532
59,978

126
1,702
5,672
13,436
(1,078)
552
(135)
20,276

14,505
10,295
37,436
62,236

126
1,702
5,672
14,571
(1,078)
552
(135)
21,410

19,106
10,295
37,436
66,837

126
1,702
5,672
15,093
(1,078)
552
(135)
21,932

19,757
10,295
37,436
1,117
68,605

126
1,702
5,672
15,633
(1,078)
552
(135)
22,473

20,432
10,295
37,436
2,840
71,003

126
1,702
5,672
16,194
(1,078)
552
(135)
23,033

21,131
10,295
37,436
4,543
73,405

126
1,702
5,672
16,775
(1,078)
552
(135)
23,614

21,856
10,295
37,436
6,351
75,938

126
1,702
5,672
17,377
(1,078)
552
(135)
24,216

22,608
10,295
37,436
8,203
78,542

126
1,702
5,672
18,001
(1,078)
552
(135)
24,841

23,387
10,295
37,436
10,135
81,253

126
1,702
5,672
18,649
(1,078)
552
(135)
25,488

24,195
10,295
37,436
12,132
84,058

126
1,702
5,672
19,320
(1,078)
552
(135)
26,159

25,033
10,295
37,436
14,206
86,970

126
1,702
5,672
20,016
(1,078)
552
(135)
26,855

25,901
10,295
37,436
16,354
89,987

126
1,702
5,672
20,738
(1,078)
552
(135)
27,577

26,802
10,295
37,436
18,583
93,116

180,923 205,410 228,116 238,801 246,220 254,475 262,949 271,776 280,905 290,381 300,200 310,383 320,940 331,888

128
1,702
5,551
9,415
(1,139)
442
(91)
16,008

Shareholders’ equity
Preferred stock
Common stock
Additional paid-in capital
Retained earnings
Treasury stock
Cumulative other comprehensive income
Other equity accounts
Total shareholders’ equity

Total liabilities and stockholders’ equity

22,225
9,869
22,664
54,758

Short-term borrowings
Accrued expenses and other liabilities
Existing long-term debt
Additional long-term debt
Total liabilities

38,448
46,435
43,585
51,268
47,364
43,757
52,294
48,311
44,632
53,340
49,278
45,525
54,406
50,263
71,708
84,013 101,847 105,921 110,158 114,564 119,147 123,913 128,869 134,024 139,385 144,960 150,759 156,789
110,156 127,598 145,604 150,553 155,683 160,999 166,511 172,224 178,147 184,287 190,653 197,254 204,098 211,195

9,145
1,615
40,869

Forecast
2004
2005

Liabilities
Noninterest-bearing deposits
Interest-bearing deposits
Total deposits

10,482
1,867
50,451

2003

101,470 113,222 148,866 143,025 147,898 152,949 158,185 163,613 169,239 175,073 181,120 187,391 193,893 200,636
(2,212)
(2,294)
(2,246)
(2,717)
(2,373)
(2,289)
(2,811)
(2,454)
(2,145)
(2,908)
(2,539)
(2,218)
(3,010)
(2,626)
99,258 110,976 146,578 140,880 145,680 150,655 155,812 161,158 166,701 172,446 178,404 184,580 190,985 197,626
2,088
2,169
2,519
2,079
2,996
2,620
2,355
3,099
2,703
2,329
3,207
2,800
2,463
2,894
5,604
5,737
6,101
6,101
6,101
6,101
6,101
6,101
6,101
6,101
6,101
6,101
6,101
6,101
18,117
23,728
27,907
21,731
33,060
28,865
25,233
34,207
29,857
26,092
35,396
30,887
26,984
31,954
180,923 205,410 228,116 238,801 246,220 254,475 262,949 271,776 280,905 290,381 300,200 310,383 320,940 331,888

9,981
1,488
44,387

Historical
2001
2002

Loans
Allowance for loan losses
Net loans
Premises and equipment, net
Goodwill
Other assets
Total assets

Assets
Cash and due from banks
Excess marketable securities
Federal funds sold and repos
Investments held for sale

$ million

Exhibit 25.7 Big Bank: Historical and Forecast Balance Sheet

694
15,093

14,571
13,436
3,582
(2)
(2,445)
14,571

Start of year retained earnings
Net income before preferred dividends
Preferred dividends
Common dividends
Other (share issuances or repurchases)
End of year retained earnings
14,571
3,703
(2)
(3,180)
15,093

(6,839)

15,831
6,101
21,932

(6,839)

15,310
6,101
21,410

8.0

197,893
134

21,932

11,385
3,648
(2)
(1,486)
(64)
13,436

(6,101)
14,175
15,120
945

8.0

191,373
134

Forecast
2004
2005

21,410

9,415
3,359
(2)
(1,102)
(167)
11,385

(5,737)
12,098
12,654
556

(5,604)
10,404
10,734
329

20,276

7.9

179,589
121

2003

Forecast changes in equity
End-of-year equity implied by target
tier 1 ratio
Components of equity other than
retained earnings
Forecast end-of-year retained earnings

Forecast tier 1 capital
Goodwill
Implied total shareholders’ equity

17,835

7.3

166,401
147

16,008

7.2

Estimate of tier 1 capital
Estimated tier 1 capital/
total risk-weighted assets (percent)

Total shareholders’ equity
(prior to any new share issuance)
Goodwill
Rough estimate tier 1 capital
Reported tier 1 capital
Difference

145,251

Historical
2001
2002

Estimate of risk-weighted assets
Total risk-weighted assets
Total risk-weighted assets/total loans
(percent)

$ million

Exhibit 25.8 Big Bank: Changes in Equity

15,093
3,830
(2)
(3,288)
15,633

15,633

(6,839)

22,473

16,372
6,101
22,473

8.0

204,651
134

2006

16,775

16,194

16,194
4,091
(2)
(3,508)
16,775

(6,839)

(6,839)

15,633
3,958
(2)
(3,396)
16,194

23,614

17,514
6,101
23,614

8.0

218,919
134

2008

23,033

16,933
6,101
23,033

8.0

211,657
134

2007

16,775
4,228
(2)
(3,624)
17,377

17,377

(6,839)

24,216

18,116
6,101
24,216

8.0

226,448
134

2009

17,377
4,370
(2)
(3,744)
18,001

18,001

(6,839)

24,841

18,740
6,101
24,841

8.0

234,253
134

2010

18,001
4,517
(2)
(3,868)
18,649

18,649

(6,839)

25,488

19,388
6,101
25,488

8.0

242,345
134

2011

18,649
4,669
(2)
(3,996)
19,320

19,320

(6,839)

26,159

20,059
6,101
26,159

8.0

250,735
134

2012

19,320
4,827
(2)
(4,129)
20,016

20,016

(6,839)

26,855

20,755
6,101
26,855

8.0

259,435
134

2013

20,016
4,990
(2)
(4,267)
20,738

20,738

(6,839)

27,577

21,477
6,101
27,577

8.0

268,457
134

2014
(CV)

695

42.8
55.1
212.7
275.9
8.7
32.8

Growth in total revenue
Growth in net income

Noninterest income/revenue
Loans/assets
Deposits/liabilities
Debt/equity (book)
Equity/total assets

Common dividends as a percent of net income
Return on average assets
Return on average equity (including goodwill)
Return on average equity (excluding goodwill)
40.7
1.7
19.1
27.8

43.4
65.3
234.0
256.2
8.9

Historical
2002
2003
20.3
12.4
67.4
8.6

percent

Exhibit 25.9 Big Bank: Output Ratios

68.3
1.5
17.2
24.3

44.7
59.9
225.3
264.1
9.0
85.9
1.5
17.1
23.8

44.7
60.1
226.9
260.8
8.9

Forecast
2004
2005
0.5
3.4
(1.8)
3.4

85.8
1.5
17.2
23.8

44.8
60.1
226.8
257.5
8.8

2006
3.4
3.4

85.8
1.5
17.4
23.8

44.8
60.2
226.8
254.3
8.8

2007
3.3
3.3

85.8
1.5
17.5
23.7

44.9
60.2
226.8
251.1
8.7

2008
3.4
3.4

85.7
1.5
17.7
23.7

44.9
60.2
226.8
247.9
8.6

2009
3.4
3.4

85.7
1.5
17.8
23.7

45.0
60.3
226.8
244.9
8.6

2010
3.4
3.4

85.6
1.5
17.9
23.7

45.1
60.3
226.8
241.8
8.5

2011
3.4
3.4

85.6
1.5
18.1
23.7

45.1
60.4
226.8
238.8
8.4

2012
3.4
3.4

85.5
1.5
18.2
23.6

45.1
60.4
226.8
235.8
8.4

2013
3.4
3.4

85.5
1.5
18.3
23.6

45.2
60.5
226.8
232.9
8.3

2014
(CV)
3.4
3.4

696
3,580
–
(1,135)
2,445

2,445
–
2,445

Check of equity cash flow
Common dividends
Share repurchases (or issuances)
Check of equity cash flow
3,288
–
3,288

3,829
–
(541)
3,288

2006

Year
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Continuing value1
Equity value

3,180
–
3,180

3,701
–
(522)
3,180

Forecast
2004
2005

Equity cash flow
Net income after preferred dividends
Other comprehensive income
Changes in equity
Equity cash flow

Continuing value assumptions: growth = 3.5%, return in incremental equity = 25%.

1

$ million

Exhibit 25.10 Big Bank: Cash Flows and Valuation

3,396
–
3,396

3,956
–
(560)
3,396

2007

Equity
cash
flow
2,445
3,180
3,288
3,396
3,508
3,624
3,744
3,868
3,996
4,129
87,557

3,508
–
3,508

4,089
–
(581)
3,508

2008

Discount
factor
(8.4%)
0.923
0.851
0.785
0.724
0.668
0.616
0.569
0.525
0.484
0.446
0.446

3,624
–
3,624

4,226
–
(602)
3,624

2009

3,868
–
3,868

4,515
–
(647)
3,868

2011

Discounted
cash flow
2,256
2,706
2,581
2,459
2,344
2,233
2,129
2,029
1,934
1,843
39,084
61,598

3,744
–
3,744

4,368
–
(624)
3,744

2010

3,996
–
3,996

4,668
–
(671)
3,996

2012

4,129
–
4,129

4,825
–
(696)
4,129

2013

SPECIFIC ISSUES IN VALUING BANKS

697

• Finally, to check our overall valuation, we also calculate an annual
economic profit forecast and economic profit continuing value. Discounting these items to the present and adding the initial level of equity, we arrive at the same value as our equity cash flow model.
Our main finding from this analysis is that a forecast that estimates
top-line revenue growing at somewhat less than nominal GDP growth and
that maintains (or slightly raises) the overall return on equity of Big Bank
can explain Big Bank’s market capitalization today. Our valuation gives us a
forward price-to-earnings multiple of 17.1 and market value-to-equity book
value of 3.0, which are both higher than peers as of this writing. These multiples reflect the higher than average spread that Big Bank earns versus its
cost of equity.

Valuing Banks from the Inside
A valuation with inside information about a bank can be much more detailed. In particular, we can understand two aspects of the bank better: the
true value creation in its lending and borrowing activities (and thus the
mismatch profit, if any), and the contribution of each of the bank’s businesses to value creation.
To understand true value creation in lending, consider the bank as consisting of a retail bank, a wholesale bank, and a treasury (see Exhibit 25.11).
The retail bank collects deposits, which provide funds that it can in turn
lend to the treasury. The treasury lends funds to the wholesale bank, which
in turn lends them to external customers. Conceptualizing these funds
transfers as a series of internal loans requires us to set a transfer price at
each step of the way, which is important in understanding the true profitability of each unit.

Exhibit 25.11 Business Unit Structure of Banks
Headquarters
Cost center

Treasury and trading
Wholesale bank
Assets
Cash
External loans
Liabilities
Deposits
Borrowing from treasury
Equity

Assets
Loans to wholesale bank
Trading assets
Liabilities
Borrowing from retail bank
Trading liabilities
Equity

Retail bank
Assets
Cash
Lending to treasury
Liabilities
Deposits
Equity

698

VALUING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

More broadly, an insider’s view of the bank helps us understand which
business units create and which destroy value. The crucial prerequisite is the
allocation of risk capital per business, which very few companies publish.
With this information, we can understand RAROC, or the ratio of net profit
to economic capital in any given business unit, the key metric used by many
banks today to assess their performance.
Risk capital information can also help us determine whether the bank as
a whole has excess capital. In such cases, we typically adjust the year 1 cash
flows such that the bank will pay out the excess.

SPECIFIC ISSUES FOR INSURANCE COMPANIES
Like banks, insurance companies are among the most challenging companies to value. While the three main types of insurance companies—life,
property and casualty, and reinsurance—differ in the kinds of risk they insure, they share certain complexities for financial analysis.
As with banks, understanding the insurance business depends on properly assessing risk. From the outside looking in, it is difficult to know how
much capital an insurer needs to hold in order to ensure that it can meet unexpected claims. Insurers themselves employ actuaries and risk management experts, while ratings agencies and regulators provide outside
scrutiny. As a financial analyst looking in from outside, you will likely have
only imperfect information about an insurer’s capital.
Another source of complexity more specific to insurers is that insurers’
cash flows extend over long periods of time. As a result it can be difficult to
match revenues and expenses to understand a company’s true profitability.
To deal with this issue, the insurance industry in the United States uses two
different accounting methods: GAAP, which is used for reporting to the
SEC, and statutory accounting, which is used for reporting to state insurance regulators. As a result, there are differences in the treatment of a number of income statement and balance sheet items; we give some specific
examples in the following discussion.
Our focus here will not be to cover insurance valuation in detail, but
rather to highlight some of the major issues and specific items you should
be aware of in insurers’ financial statements.

Understanding the Income Statement
Insurers derive revenues from a number of different sources:
• Premium income flows from the payments that customers make for
their policies. Since most policies last longer than one year, the premium income in any given year is typically just a tranche of a longerterm cash flow.

SPECIFIC ISSUES FOR INSURANCE COMPANIES 699

• There is a time lag between when customers pay premiums and
when insurers must pay out any benefits and claims. During this period, insurers invest the funds received from their customers and derive investment income in the form of interest or dividends. Like
banking, insurance is essentially a “spread” business, where the insurer seeks to earn profits from the spread between investment returns and its sources of funding.
• Insurers can also realize capital gains (or losses) on their investment
portfolio. In terms of the company’s fundamental economics, it
should make no difference whether the company realizes these gains
(or losses) in any given year (with the exception of possible tax consequences). However, this decision can significantly affect a company’s
reported net income in any given year.
• Finally, many life insurers aspire to sell customers a broader range of
investment products. When they sell these products, they derive fee
income (for example, asset management fees on mutual funds or similar products).
On the cost side, insurers have several industry-specific items you should
be aware of, as well as operating costs similar to those of any company:
• One unique item is the cost of reinsurance, which occurs when an insurer transfers the underlying risk of a policy to a reinsurer. Insurers
generally net this cost against premiums rather than report it as a
separate item.
• Benefits and claims are typically a very large expense. Depending on
the type of product sold, these items may be labeled as “benefits
and claims,” “interest credited to policyholders,” “dividends payable to policyholders,” or similar items. In property and casualty insurance, the ratio of benefits and claims to premiums is called the
loss ratio.
• Commissions and other policy acquisition costs are the costs incurred to
sell policies to customers. Commissions are typically paid when the
policy is sold, even though the policy is expected to generate premiums for several years, creating an accounting dilemma about when to
record commissions incurred as an expense. The two accounting systems used for insurers in the United States take different approaches
to these questions, based on their underlying goals:
—GAAP accounting seeks to match revenues and expenses as
closely as possible over time. Since an insurance policy is likely to
bring in premium income over multiple years, GAAP states that
the costs associated with selling the policy to the customer in the
first place should be spread over the expected life of the policy.

700

VALUING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

Thus, companies capitalize these costs and put them on their balance sheet as an asset called “deferred (policy) acquisition costs”
(sometimes shortened to “DAC asset”). In each subsequent year,
companies recognize an expense called “amortization of deferred
(policy) acquisition costs,” which represents each year’s tranche of
the costs associated with the premiums recognized that year, and
the DAC asset is reduced accordingly. Unlike goodwill amortization, the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs represents a real economic expense for the insurance company, where
the cash costs of commissions and so on, are spread over time.
—Because statutory accounting has different overriding principles
than GAAP accounting, it treats DAC costs differently. Statutory
accounting focuses on the financial strength of an insurer and its
policyholders. Thus, it tends to treat many items on a cash basis, in
contrast to the accrual basis of GAAP accounting. In particular,
statutory accounting requires that an insurer expense all its commission costs in the year that they are incurred, and does not allow
companies to create a DAC asset.
• Insurance companies also incur other expenses typical of any company, such as selling, general, and administrative expenses.
Insurers refer to the ratio of total costs (including benefits or claims and
all operating expenses) to premium revenues as the combined ratio. The
combined ratio for many insurance companies exceeds 100 (all costs exceed
premiums). These insurance companies stay in business and earn returns
on equity by investing the premiums they receive to make up for their underwriting losses. The best-performing insurers, however, try to maintain
discipline in their underwriting performance.

Understanding the Balance Sheet
The asset side of an insurance company’s balance sheet is typically
weighted heavily to a few items:
• Investments predominate on the asset side of an insurance company
balance sheet. Companies typically provide a breakdown of the kind
of assets they invest in (fixed income, equity, or alternatives). Under
GAAP accounting, equity and debt securities are both on the balance
sheet at fair value; under statutory accounting, debt securities and
preferred stock that the insurer intends to hold to maturity are carried on the balance at historical cost (plus amortization or any premium or discount to face value).

SPECIFIC ISSUES FOR INSURANCE COMPANIES

701

• Another large asset on the books of many life insurers is called
“separate account” assets. These represent funds entrusted to the
insurance company to invest on behalf of their customers (for instance, in mutual funds). These assets are exactly counterbalanced
by separate account liabilities, as the insurer has no claim on the underlying assets.
• Under GAAP accounting, insurers may have a deferred policy acquisition cost asset, as described with the income statement items.
• Insurers also may have a number of “typical” assets on their books,
such as working capital, fixed assets, and goodwill. However, even
here, GAAP and statutory accounting may vary. Statutory accounting requires that certain kinds of assets (such as furniture and
equipment) be written off against surplus. This treatment is in line
with the general conservatism of statutory accounting; it treats
these purchases as cash expenses, not as longer-term investments
for the company.
The liability side of the balance sheet has a number of items to note as well:
• The largest liability for any insurer is its reserves. These represent the
present value of expected benefits and claims to be paid out (less the
present value of expected premiums for life insurers). Insurers use
actuarial guidelines to estimate the size of reserves, taking into account such factors as underlying customer risks, persistence (rate of
renewals), investment returns, and inflation. Companies must use a
certain amount of judgment in estimating their reserves, and publicly traded companies’ shares often react negatively when insurers
announce that they must increase reserves, an action taken as a sign
that management previously lacked caution. Also, reserve requirements under statutory accounting generally are more stringent than
those under GAAP accounting.
• Insurers also have debt and equity financing. Debt is straightforward,
as the balance sheet amounts and related notes are generally selfexplanatory. Equity, however, can be somewhat more complicated. As
for banks, under GAAP accounting, equity can be affected by pension accounting, foreign-currency translation, and other items.
Under statutory accounting, equity reported on the balance sheet
(generally referred to as surplus) may be very different from the equity reported under GAAP, as this account is affected by various differences in accounting policies (for example, differences in valuing
fixed income investments, recognition of policy acquisition costs, and
acquisition of fixed assets).

702

VALUING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

Implications for Valuation
Despite the inherent complexities of insurance companies and the long list
of accounting issues, it is still possible to do an informative valuation of an
insurer. We have prepared a disguised example of a large U.S. life insurance
company, which we refer to as Acme, as captured in Exhibits 25.12 to 25.16.
We used the following approach:
• For the income statement (see Exhibit 25.12), we forecast growth in
premium and fee income as our main drivers. Investment income is
based on growth in investments (as detailed in the discussion of the
balance sheet that follows) and a forecast investment yield. For Acme,
we estimate that over the long run, the growth in each of these items
will be 4.5 percent (within the range of nominal GDP growth forecasts in the United States).
• On the expense side, we forecast benefits and claims as a percentage
of premium and fee income equal to 130 percent, thus keeping the
overall profitability stable. We also forecast stable rates of additions
to and amortization of deferred acquisition costs.
• For the balance sheet (see Exhibit 25.13 on p. 704), we project that investments will grow in line with overall premium and fee income,
and that reserves in turn will grow in line with investments. This
last assumption is a simplification, because the actual sensitivity of
reserves to premiums may be low, depending on the life span (also
known as the “tail”) of the business; however, this is our best outsidein assumption. In Exhibit 25.14 on page 705, we balance the balance
sheet by assuming a target level of equity to assets (to approximate
solvency) and then solving the statement of changes in equity accordingly, with dividends, share buybacks, or issuances as a plug.
The resulting return on equity for Acme is 10.5 percent including goodwill and 11.5 percent excluding goodwill (see Exhibit 25.15 on p. 706). These
returns on equity are in line with our hypothesis that Acme’s economics are
unlikely to change over the forecast period.
While Acme has reasonable growth, its return on equity is disappointing as it is close to Acme’s 10.5 percent cost of equity. This indicates that
Acme is not generating much value for its shareholders.
To forecast the cash flow (see Exhibit 25.16 on p. 707), we use our general formula: Net Income + Other Comprehensive Income − Changes in Equity. The other comprehensive income is especially important here, as it
captures the company’s unrealized capital gains. From an economic perspective, capital gains (or losses) are a cash flow item, whether or not they
are realized. However, since U.S. accounting strictly segregates realized

703

Income from continuing operations before tax
Income tax
Income from continuing
operations after tax
Nonrecurring items
Net income

Benefits and claims
Interest expense
Amortization of deferred
acquisitions costs (DAC)
Other operating expenses
Total benefits and expenses

Fee income
Premium income
Net investment income
Net realized gains (losses)
Other
Total revenues

$ million

342
17
359
8
367

(26)
949

(1,541)
(7,220)

(1,217)
(5,755)
1,307
(331)
976

(3,942)
(177)
(1,560)

(3,612)
(126)
(801)

Historical
2001
2002
2,344
2,365
578
695
3,995
4,413
(30)
(203)
176
291
7,062
7,562

(1)
1,022

1,298
(275)
1,023

(1,895)
(7,754)

(4,719)
(221)
(919)

2003
2,592
980
5,137
(196)
538
9,051

Exhibit 25.12 Acme Insurance: Income Statement

–
1,146

1,528
(382)
1,146

(1,926)
(8,104)

(4,870)
(297)
(1,011)

–
1,173

1,564
(391)
1,173

(2,013)
(8,501)

(5,089)
(299)
(1,100)

Forecast
2004
2005
2,708
2,830
1,024
1,070
5,336
5,576
–
–
563
588
9,631 10,065

–
1,206

1,608
(402)
1,206

(2,104)
(8,910)

(5,318)
(300)
(1,188)

2006
2,957
1,119
5,827
–
614
10,518

–
1,244

1,659
(415)
1,244

(2,198)
(9,332)

(5,557)
(302)
(1,274)

2007
3,091
1,169
6,089
–
642
10,991
(6,069)
(305)
(1,447)

2009
3,375
1,277
6,650
–
701
12,003
(6,342)
(307)
(1,534)

2010
3,527
1,334
6,949
–
733
12,543

(6,627)
(309)
(1,621)

2011
3,686
1,394
7,262
–
766
13,107

(6,925)
(311)
(1,711)

2012
3,851
1,457
7,589
–
800
13,697

(7,237)
(312)
(1,802)

2013
4,025
1,522
7,930
–
836
14,313

(7,563)
(314)
(1,895)

2014
4,206
1,591
8,287
–
874
14,957

–
1,288

1,717
(429)
1,288

–
1,336

1,781
(445)
1,336

–
1,389

1,852
(463)
1,389

–
1,446

1,929
(482)
1,446

–
1,508

2,011
(503)
1,508

–
1,575

2,099
(525)
1,575

–
1,645

2,194
(548)
1,645

(2,991)
(2,297)
(2,401)
(2,509)
(2,621)
(2,739)
(2,863)
(9,769) (10,221) (10,691) (11,179) (11,686) (12,214) (12,764)

(5,807)
(304)
(1,361)

2008
3,230
1,222
6,363
–
671
11,486

704
Historical
Forecast
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
90,005
99,215 106,723 111,526 116,545 121,789 127,270 132,997 138,982 145,236 151,771 158,601 165,738
6,962
10,309
7,659
10,962
8,336
14,359
11,619
9,001
15,086
12,284
9,656
12,961
13,651
1,054
1,056
1,056
1,056
1,056
1,056
1,056
1,056
1,056
1,056
1,056
1,056
1,056
4,658
7,376
6,074
9,191
7,708
6,463
9,605
8,054
6,754
10,037
8,417
7,058
8,796
115,801 140,156 144,361 148,692 153,153 157,747 162,480 167,354 172,375 177,546 182,872 188,359 194,009
218,479 254,160 266,940 277,028 287,468 298,277 309,475 321,080 333,113 345,594 358,542 371,979 385,926
83,431
91,973
98,934 103,386 108,038 112,900 117,980 123,290 128,838 134,635 140,694 147,025 153,641
6
472
575
496
691
597
515
717
619
534
642
554
666
2,754
3,233
3,233
3,233
3,233
3,233
3,233
3,233
3,233
3,233
3,233
3,233
3,233
2,035
182
4,353
2,487
660
4,847
2,943
1,125
3,404
1,582
3,873
7,576
8,315
10,551
8,847
13,148
11,025
9,245
13,740
11,522
9,661
12,040
10,096
12,582
115,801 140,156 144,361 148,692 153,153 157,747 162,480 167,354 172,375 177,546 182,872 188,359 194,009
209,569 244,149 256,053 265,730 275,744 286,112 296,853 307,986 319,528 331,500 343,920 356,809 370,187
8,910
10,011
12,621
10,887
15,170
13,095
11,298
15,739
13,585
11,724
14,094
12,165
14,622
218,479 254,160 266,940 277,028 287,468 298,277 309,475 321,080 333,113 345,594 358,542 371,979 385,926

Investments
Deferred policy acquisition costs
Goodwill
Other assets
Separate account assets
Total assets

Policy reserves
Short-term debt
Existing long-term debt
Additional long-term debt
Other liabilities
Liabilities related to separate accounts
Total liabilities

Shareholders' equity
Total liabilities and equity

$ million

Exhibit 25.13 Acme Insurance: Balance Sheet

705

Net income
Net unrealized gains (losses) on securities
Other comprehensive income
Total comprehensive income
Dividends
Share issuance (buyback/plug)
Other
Total change in equity

Target end-of-year equity
(based on equity/assets ratio)
Start-of-year equity
Forecast change in equity

$ million

16
1,025

949
226
(23)
1,152
(142)
332
430
25
787
(162)
1,936
(260)
2,300

Historical
2001
2002

915
305
(64)
1,156
(181)
–
20
994

2003

Exhibit 25.14 Acme Insurance: Changes in Equity

1,146
328
–
1,474
(205)
(393)
–
876
1,173
343
–
1,515
(231)
(873)
–
411
1,206
358
–
1,564
(261)
(877)
–
426

(11,298)
426

(10,011)
876
(10,887)
411

2006
11,724

Forecast
2004
2005
10,887
11,298

1,244
374
–
1,619
(295)
(883)
–
441

(11,724)
441

2007
12,165

1,288
391
–
1,679
(333)
(889)
–
457

(12,165)
457

2008
12,621

1,336
409
–
1,745
(376)
(895)
–
473

(12,621)
473

2009
13,095

1,389
427
–
1,816
(424)
(901)
–
491

(13,095)
491

2010
13,585

1,446
446
–
1,893
(479)
(904)
–
509

(13,585)
509

2011
14,094

1,508
466
–
1,974
(541)
(905)
–
528

(14,094)
528

2012
14,622

1,575
487
–
2,062
(611)
(903)
–
548

(14,622)
548

2013
15,170

1,645
509
–
2,154
(690)
(896)
–
569

(15,170)
569

2014
15,739

706

percent

Total investment yield
(investment income, realized
and unrealized gains)

Net income margin
Equity/revenues
Return on average equity
(including goodwill)
Return on average equity
(excluding goodwill)

Growth in revenues
Growth in benefits and claims
Growth in net income

5.2

4.8
117.8

5.3

12.2

12.2

5.3

11.9
113.0
11.0

5.3

11.7

11.7
112.3
10.6

Forecast
2004
2005
6.4
4.5
3.2
4.5
12.1
2.4

11.3
110.6
10.8

Historical
2002
2003
7.1
19.7
9.2
19.7
(61.4)
178.7

Exhibit 25.15 Acme Insurance: Output Ratios

5.3

11.5

11.5
111.5
10.5

2006
4.5
4.5
2.8

5.3

11.4

11.3
110.7
10.4

2007
4.5
4.5
3.2

5.3

11.4

11.2
109.9
10.4

2008
4.5
4.5
3.5

5.3

11.3

11.1
109.1
10.4

2009
4.5
4.5
3.7

5.3

11.3

11.1
108.3
10.4

2010
4.5
4.5
4.0

5.3

11.3

11.0
107.5
10.5

2011
4.5
4.5
4.1

5.3

11.3

11.0
106.8
10.5

2012
4.5
4.5
4.3

5.3

11.4

11.0
106.0
10.6

2013
4.5
4.5
4.4

5.3

11.4

11.0
105.2
10.6

2014
4.5
4.5
4.5

707

25
(2,300)
(1,478)
(64)
(994)
268

Historical
2002
2003
367
1,022
430
305

Continuing value assumptions: growth = 4.0%, return in incremental equity = 11%.

1

Check of equity cash flow
Dividends
Share repurchases
Other
Equity cash flow

Net income
Net unrealized gains (losses)
on securities
Other comprehensive income
Change in equity
Equity cash flow

$ million

Exhibit 25.16 Acme Insurance: Cash Flows

205
393
–
597

–
(876)
597

231
873
–
1,104

–
(411)
1,104

Forecast
2004
2005
1,146
1,173
328
343

295
883
–
1,178

–
(441)
1,178

2007
1,244
374

Year
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Continuing value1
Equity value

261
877
–
1,138

–
(426)
1,138

2006
1,206
358

376
895
–
1,271

–
(473)
1,271

2009
1,336
409

Equity
cash
flow
597
1,104
1,138
1,178
1,222
1,271
1,325
1,384
1,446
1,514
21,091

333
889
–
1,222

–
(457)
1,222

2008
1,288
391

Discount
factor
(10.5%)
0.905
0.819
0.741
0.671
0.607
0.549
0.497
0.450
0.407
0.368
0.368

424
901
–
1,325

–
(491)
1,325

2010
1,389
427

479
904
–
1,384

–
(509)
1,384

2011
1,446
446

Discounted
cash flow
541
904
844
790
742
698
659
622
589
558
7,771
14,714

541
905
–
1,446

–
(528)
1,446

2012
1,508
466

611
903
–
1,514

–
(548)
1,514

2013
1,575
487

690
896
–
1,586

–
(569)
1,586

2014
1,645
509

708

VALUING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

from unrealized gains, we need to include the other comprehensive income
items in order to better reflect Acme’s economics.
Our $14.6 billion DCF value for Acme is within 10 percent of its actual
market value at the time of writing. Its 12.8 forward price-to-earnings ratio
is generally in line with peers, as is its implied 1.3 market-to-book ratio.
However, Acme’s valuation is highly dependent on its ability to invest successfully and create an ongoing stream of capital gains, without which the
company would barely create value.

Valuing Insurance Companies from the Inside
If we were to value an insurance company from the inside, we would seek to
take the valuation to a greater level of detail on a number of dimensions:
• For a life insurer, we would try to understand its embedded value.
This concept—widely used and published in Europe—aims to communicate the value of the insurer’s current book of business. It is defined as the present value of the future cash flow from business in
force (that is, already-written business) plus the book value of
shareholders’ equity. Because embedded value incorporates a calculation of NPV, it avoids many of the timing issues inherent in yearon-year profitability calculations. Analysts use embedded value in
many contexts, such as calculating multiples and understanding
how much of a company’s market value comes from existing versus
future business.
• For any kind of insurer, we would try to gain a more detailed sense of
the company’s overall solvency position and whether or not the business has capital above its economic needs and regulatory requirements. If it does, we could incorporate in our valuation scenarios
where the company either deploys the excess capital in new businesses or distributes it to shareholders.
• We would also differentiate various lines of business for the company,
using internal information about the economic capital in each business.
This would most likely include separate valuations of the underwriting
functions (and, if possible, a separate valuation of the investment function) to help management understand where value was truly being created, as well as valuations of the separate product lines.
• If possible, we would explicitly model the “run-off triangle” (the expected claims payout per year) per product line. That model would
capture the expected claims on existing and future business for each
forecast year and give a better sense of profitability by product and
by time period.

REVIEW QUESTIONS

709

These more detailed analyses, available only when working with internal
data, would give us much greater insight into the value creation of each
business unit and/or product of the company in question.

SUMMARY
Valuing financial institutions is difficult. We need extensive inside information before we can truly understand what risks are in the portfolio of a
bank or insurer, or where the value is created in their different businesses.
Nonetheless, correctly applying the equity cash flow method can help analysts understand a financial institution’s performance and its value.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Why should an analyst compute the value of a financial institution
by employing the equity cash flow method when the enterprise DCF
and economic profit models have been stressed throughout the text?
2. Identify the value drivers embedded in the equity cash flow model.
How do the equity cash flow drivers differ from the drivers of the
enterprise DCF and the economic profit models?
3. Define duration. Why is duration important both for understanding a
financial institution’s risk and for analyzing performance?
4. Compare the typical duration of a commercial bank’s asset structure
to its liability structure. What does the relationship between these
two duration measurements suggest to the analyst?
5. Compare the typical duration of a life insurance company’s asset
structure to its liability structure. What does the relationship between these two duration measurements suggest to the analyst?
6. What are deferred acquisition costs? How are deferred acquisition
costs computed? Should deferred acquisition costs be treated the
same way that amortization costs are treated in the firm’s accounting
statements? Should deferred acquisition costs be treated the same
way as amortization costs in the computation of enterprise value?
7. Statutory accounting standards differ from GAAP standards for the
valuation of many account items. Identify and discuss the importance of two differences between these standards. Would differences between the two standards, with respect to asset valuation
and expense recognition, lead to significant differences between a

710

VALUING FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

corporate insider’s estimate of value and an external analyst’s estimate of corporate value?
8. Define the term reserves as it relates to a life insurance company’s liability section of the balance sheet. In what way is a life insurance
company’s reserve position similar to a company’s accumulated pension obligation?
9. The following is a very simplified version of Neighborhood Bank
System’s balance sheet, income statement, and average rates for 2005.
Value Neighborhood Bank System, Inc., using the equity cash flow
method. Depreciation is $1.434 million for 2005. Neighborhood Bank
System, Inc.’s equity beta is 1.20.
Income Statement
2005
Interest income
− Interest expense
Net interest income
+ Other income
−Other expenses
Net profit before tax
−Taxes
Net income

Amount

Rate

66.919
(25.221)
41.698
5.120
(26.498)
20.320
(7.721)
12.598

8.11%
3.52%
4.59%

38.00%

Balance Sheet
2005
Amount
Cash reserves
Investment securities
Net loans
Net premises, other assets
Less: provision for credit losses
TOTAL ASSETS

32.411
378.520
446.135
25.526
(6.281)
876.311

Interest-bearing deposits
Noninterest-bearing deposits
Other short-term liabilities
Federal funds purchased
Term borrowings
LIABILITIES
SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY
TOTAL

552.892
98.587
6.102
57.300
05.550
820.431
55.880
876.311

Rate
6.93%
9.12%

3.29%

4.00%
4.49%
13.48%

APPENDIX

A

Economic Profit and the
Key Value Driver Formula
In Chapter 3, we convert the growing cash flow perpetuity:

V=

FCF1
WACC − g

into the key value driver formula:

V=

g 

NOPLAT1  1 −


ROIC 
WACC − g

This representation of value can be rearranged further into a formula based on
economic profit. We do this to demonstrate that discounted cash flow is also
equivalent to the current book value of invested capital plus the present value of
economic profit. A more general (and more technical proof) on their equivalence is
provided in Appendix B.
To convert the key value driver formula into a formula based on economic
profit, we use the definition of ROIC as NOPLAT divided by invested capital to
restate NOPLAT as the product of invested capital (IC) and ROIC:

V=

g 

IC0 × ( ROIC ) ×  1 −
ROIC 

WACC − g

711

712

APPENDIX A

where

IC0 = Current invested capital
ROIC = NOPLAT/beginning-of-year invested capital
g = Growth in NOPLAT and cash flow
WACC = Weighted average cost of capital

Next, simplify by distributing ROIC in the numerator:

V = IC0 ×

ROIC − g
WACC − g

This equation more clearly shows two requirements for using the key value
driver formula: Both WACC and ROIC must be greater than the growth rate in
cash flow. If WACC is less than the growth rate, cash flows grow faster than they
can be discounted, and value approaches infinity (perpetuity-based formulas
should never be used to value cash flows whose growth rates exceed WACC). Alternatively, if ROIC is less than the growth rate, cash flows are negative, producing a negative value. In actuality, this situation is unlikely; investors would not
finance a company that is never expected to return positive cash flow.
To complete the transformation to economic profit, we next add and subtract
WACC in the numerator:

V = IC0 ×

ROIC − WACC + WACC − g
WACC − g

We separate the fraction into two components and then simplify:

V = IC0 ×
= IC0 +

WACC − g
ROIC − WACC
+ IC0 ×
WACC − g
WACC − g
IC0 × (ROIC − WACC)
WACC − g

Economic profit is defined as invested capital times the difference of ROIC
minus WACC. Substituting this definition into the previous equation leads to
our final equation:

V = IC0 +

Economic Profit 1
WACC − g

According to this formula, a company’s enterprise value equals the book value
of its invested capital plus the present value of all future economic profits (the
final term is a growing perpetuity of economic profits). Note that if expected economic profits are zero going forward, the value of a company equals its book value.
In addition, if economic profits are expected to be less than zero in the future,
then enterprise value should trade at less than the book value of invested capital—
an occurrence observed in practice.

APPENDIX

B

Discounted Economic
Profit Equals Discounted
Free Cash Flow
In this appendix, we provide a generalized proof of the equivalence between discounted cash flow and discounted economic profit. A less technical but specialized proof of equivalence is demonstrated using the key value driver formula in
Appendix A. To prove equivalence, start by computing the present value of a periodic stream of cash flow:
∞

FCFt

t =1

(1 + WACC)t

V=∑
where

FCFt = Free cash flow in year t
WACC = Weighted average cost of capital

Next add and subtract the cumulative sum of all future amounts of invested
capital (IC):
∞

∞
∞
ICt
FCF
−
+
∑
∑
t
t
t
t =1 (1 + WACC)
t = 0 (1 + WACC)
t = 0 (1 + WACC)

V=∑

ICt

where ICt = Invested capital for year t
Next, adjust the previous equation slightly. First, strip invested capital at time
zero from the first cumulative sum. Next, convert the second cumulative sum to t =
1 to infinity, changing each each t inside the second cumulative sum to t − 1. This
new representation is identical to the original representation, but will allow us to
cancel terms later. The new representation equals:
713

714

APPENDIX B

∞

V = IC0 + ∑
t =1

∞

ICt
(1 + WACC)

t

−∑
t =1

ICt−1
t −1

(1 + WACC)

∞

FCF

t =1

(1 + WACC)t

+∑

Multiply the second cumulative sum by (1 + WACC)/(1 + WACC). This action
converts the exponent t − 1 in the denominator of the cumulative sum to t. We also
substitute for free cash flow in the third cumulative sum, using its definition,
NOPLAT less the increase of invested capital:
∞
(1 + WACC)ICt−1 ∞ NOPLAT − (ICt − ICt−1 )
−
+∑
∑
t
(1 + WACC)t
(1 + WACC)t
t =1
t =1 (1 + WACC)
t =1
∞

V = IC0 + ∑

ICt

Because there is now a consistent denominator across all three cumulative sums,
combine the final three terms into a single cumulative sum:
∞

ICt − (1 + WACC)ICt−1 + NOPLAT − ICt + ICt−1

t=1

(1 + WACC)t

V = IC0 + ∑

In the second term of the numerator, we distribute (1 + WACC) ICt−1 into its two
components, ICt−1 and WACC(ICt−1):
∞

ICt − ICt−1 − WACC(ICt−1 ) + NOPLAT − ICt + ICt−1

t =1

(1 + WACC)t

V = IC0 + ∑

Simplify by collecting terms:
∞

NOPLAT − WACC ( ICt−1 )

t =1

(1 + WACC)t

V = IC0 + ∑

The numerator is the definition of economic profit; therefore, the result is a valuation based on economic profit:
∞

V = IC0 + ∑
t =1

Economic Profit t
(1 + WACC)t

The enterprise value of a company equals the book value of its invested capital
plus the present value of all future economic profits. To calculate the value correctly, you must calculate economic profit using last year’s (i.e., the beginning-ofyear) invested capital.
The interdependence of invested capital, economic profit, and free cash flow is
not surprising. Think of discounted cash flow this way: A portion of future cash
flows is required to cover the required return for the investor’s capital. The remaining cash flow is either used to grow invested capital (to generate additional
future cash flows) or returned to investors as an extra “bonus.” This bonus, of
course, is valuable, so investors desire (and are willing to pay a premium for) cash
flows above the amount required. Subsequently, companies with positive economic profits will trade at a premium to the book value of invested capital.

APPENDIX

C

Adjusted Present Value
Equals Discounted
Free Cash Flow
In Chapter 5, we numerically demonstrate the equivalence of enterprise DCF, adjusted present value, and the cash-flow-to-equity valuation when leverage (as
measured by the market-based debt-to-equity ratio) is constant. In this appendix,
we demonstrate their equivalence algebraically. To simplify the analysis, we assume cash flows for debt and equity are constant. This way we can use zerogrowth perpetuities to analyze the relation between methods.1

ENTERPRISE DISCOUNTED CASH FLOW
Enterprise value equals the market value of debt plus the market value of equity:

V=D+E
Next, multiply the right side of the equation by a complex fraction equivalent to 1.
Over the next few steps, the fraction’s denominator will be converted into the
weighted average cost of capital. We will show later that the numerator equals free
cash flow.

 CFd (1 − Tm ) + CFe 
V = ( D + E) × 
 CFd (1 − Tm ) + CFe 
1
For an analysis that applies to more complex situations (i.e., when cash f lows can follow any
pattern), see J. A. Miles and J. R. Ezzell, “The Weighted Average Cost of Capital, Perfect Capital
Markets, and Project Life: A Clarification,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 15
(1980): 719–730 (for a discussion of enterprise DCF and WACC); and S. C. Myers, “Interactions
of Corporate Financing and Invest ment Decisions: Implications for Capital Budgeting,” Journal
of Finance, 29 (1974): 1–25 (for a discussion of adjusted present value).

715

716

APPENDIX C

where

CFd = Cash flow to debt holders
Tm = Marginal tax rate
CFe = Cash flow to equity holders

Since cash flow to debt holders is constant, we use a perpetuity to value the debt:

D=

CFd
kd

where kd = Cost of debt
Rearranging this equation to solve for cash flow leads to:

CFd = D × kd
The same holds true for equity cash flows: CFe = E × ke. Substitute these two expressions into the denominator of the value expression:

 CFd (1 − Tm ) + CFe 
V = ( D + E) × 

 D ( kd ) (1 − Tm ) + E ( ke ) 
Next, divide the numerator and denominator by (D + E). This will eliminate the
first (D + E) expression and place it in the denominator as a divisor. Distributing
the term across the denominator leads to:

V=

CFd (1 − Tm ) + CFe
E
D
kd ) (1 − Tm ) +
(
( ke )
D+E
D+E

The expression in the denominator is the weighted average cost of capital
(WACC). Therefore, the equation can be rewritten as:

V=

CFd (1 − Tm ) + CFe
WACC

such that

WACC =

E
D
kd ) (1 − Tm ) +
(
( ke )
D+E
D+E

Note how the after-tax cost of debt and the cost of equity are weighted by each security’s market weight to enterprise value. This is why market-based values, and
not book values, should be used to build the cost of capital.
Next, we focus on the numerator. Assuming only interest is paid out (and that
debt is constant and principal payments are rolled over), cash flow to debt holders
equals interest paid. This allows us to substitute Interest for CFd. Cash flow to equity (CFe) equals EBIT − Interest − Taxes − Net investment + Increase in debt.
Since debt is constant, the last term in cash flow to equity is zero. Substitute the
expressions for CFd and CFe into the previous equation:

APPENDIX C

V=

717

Interest(1 − Tm ) + EBIT − Interest − Taxes − Net Investment
WACC

Next, distribute the after-tax interest expression into its two components:

V=

Interest − Tm ( Interest ) + EBIT − Interest − Taxes − Net Investment
WACC

Simplify by canceling and rearranging terms. We now have free cash flow in the
numerator:

V=

EBIT − (Taxes + Tm [ Interest ] ) − Net Investment
WACC

Since NOPLAT is defined as EBIT less all-equity taxes, we can further simplify the
equation:2

V=

NOPLAT − Net Investment Free Cash Flow
=
WACC
WACC

This is why free cash flow should be discounted at the weighted average cost of
capital to determine enterprise value. Remember, however, that you can only use
a constant WACC over time when leverage is expected to remain constant (i.e.,
debt grows as the business grows). This restriction was implicitly imposed by
using securities with constant cash flows.3

ADJUSTED PRESENT VALUE
To determine enterprise value using adjusted present value, once again start with
V = D + E and multiply by a fraction equal to 1. This time, however, do not include
the marginal tax rate in the fraction:

 CFd + CFe 
V = ( D + E) × 
 CFd + CFe 
Following the same process as before, convert each cash flow in the denominator to
its present value times its expected return, and divide the fraction by (D + E)/(D + E):

V=

CFd + CFe
E
D
kd ) +
(
( ke )
D+E
D+E

2
All-equity taxes are the hypothetical taxes computed as if the company were financed entirely
with equity. They equal reported taxes plus the interest tax shield.
3
To see this restriction applied in a more general setting, see Miles and Ezzell, “The Weighted
Average Cost of Capital,” note 1.

718

APPENDIX C

In Appendix D, we show that if the company’s interest tax shields have the
same risk as the company’s operating assets (as we would expect when the company maintains a constant capital structure), the fraction’s denominator equals ku,
the unlevered cost of equity. Make this substitution into the previous equation:

V=

CFd + CFe
ku

Next, we focus on the numerator, substituting the definitions of cash flow to
debt and cash flow to equity as we did for enterprise DCF:

V=

Interest + EBIT − Interest − Taxes − Net Investment
ku

In this equation, the two interest terms cancel, so we simplify by canceling these
two terms. We next insert Tm(Interest) − Tm(Interest) into the numerator of the
expression:

V=

EBIT − Taxes + Tm ( Interest ) − Tm ( Interest ) − Net I nvestment
ku

Next, aggregate reported taxes and the negative expression for Tm(Interest)
into all-equity taxes. Move the positive expression for Tm(Interest) into a separate
fraction:

V=

EBIT − (Taxes + Tm [ Interest ] ) − Net Investment
ku

+

Tm ( Interest )
ku

At this point, we once again have free cash flow in the numerator of the first
fraction. The second fraction equals the present value of the interest tax shield.
Thus, enterprise value equals free cash flow discounted by the unlevered cost of
equity plus the present value of the interest tax shield:

V=

Free Cash Flow
+ PV(Interest Tax Shield)
ku

This expression is commonly referred to as adjusted present value.
In this simple proof, we assumed tax shields should be discounted at the unlevered cost of equity. This need not be the case. Some financial analysts discount
expected interest tax shields at the cost of debt. If you do this, however, free cash
flow discounted at the traditional WACC (defined earlier) and adjusted present
value will lead to different valuations. In this case, WACC must be adjusted to reflect the alternative assumption concerning the risk of tax shields.

APPENDIX

D

Levering and Unlevering
the Cost of Equity
In Chapter 5, we introduced adjusted present value (APV). To apply APV, first discount free cash flow at the unlevered cost of equity. Then add the present value of
any financing side effects, such as the interest tax shield, to this value to determine enterprise value. One key input for APV is the unlevered cost of equity. In
this appendix, we derive various formulas that can be used to compute the unlevered cost of equity under different assumptions.
Chapter 10 introduced a second application for the unlevered cost of equity. To
determine the cost of equity for use in a company’s cost of capital, we did not use
raw regression results ( because of estimation error). Instead, we relied on an unlevered industry beta that was relevered to the company’s target capital structure.
To build an unlevered industry beta, we use techniques identical to the unlevered
cost of equity. We discuss both in this appendix.

UNLEVERED COST OF EQUITY
Franco Modigliani and Merton Miller postulated that the market value of a company’s economic assets, such as operating assets (Vu) and tax shields (Vtxa), should
equal the market value of its financial claims, such as debt (D) and equity (E):

Vu + Vtxa = Enterprise Value = D + E

(1)

A second result of Modigliani and Miller’s work is that the total risk of the company’s economic assets, operating and financial, must equal the total risk of the financial claims against those assets:

Vu

V

D

E

( ku ) + V +txaV ( ktxa ) = D + E ( kd ) + D + E ( ke )
V +V
u

txa

u

txa

(2)
719

720

APPENDIX D

where ku = Unlevered cost of equity
ktxa = Cost of capital for the company’s interest tax shields
kd = Cost of debt
ke = Cost of equity
The four terms in this equation represent operating assets, tax assets, debt, and
equity, respectively.
Since ku is unobservable, we must solve for it, using the equation’s other inputs. The required return on tax shields, ktxa, is also unobservable. With two unknowns and only one equation, we must therefore impose additional restrictions
to solve for ku. If debt is a constant proportion of enterprise value (i.e., debt grows
as the business grows), ktxa should equal ku. Imposing this restriction leads to:

Vu

V

D

E

( ku ) + V +txaV ( ku ) = D + E ( kd ) + D + E ( ke )
V +V
u

u

txa

txa

Combining terms on the left side generates an equation for the unlevered cost of
equity when debt is a constant proportion of enterprise value:

ku =

D
E
( kd ) +
( ke )
D+E
D+E

(3)

Unlevered Cost of Equity When ktxa Equals kd
Some financial analysts model the required return on interest tax shields equal to
the cost of debt. In this case, equation 2 can be expressed as follows:

Vu

V

D

E

txa
ku ) +
(
( kd ) = D + E ( kd ) + D + E ( ke )
V +V
V +V
u

u

txa

txa

To solve for ku, multiply both sides by enterprise value:

Vuku + Vtxakd = Dkd + Eke
and move Vtxa kd to the right side of the equation:

Vuku = (D − Vtxa)kd + Eke
To eliminate Vu from the left side of the equation, we rearrange equation 1 to Vu =
D − Vtxa + E and divide both sides by this value:

ku =

D − Vtxa

E

txa

txa

( kd ) + D − V + E ( ke )
D−V +E

(4)

APPENDIX D

721

Equation 4 mirrors equation 2 closely. It differs from equation 2 only in that the
market value of debt is reduced by the present value of expected tax shields.
Exhibit D.1 summarizes the four methods to estimate the unlevered cost of
equity. The two formulas in the top row assume that the risk associated with interest tax shields equals the risk of operations. When this is true, whether debt is
constant or expected to change, the formula remains the same. The bottom-row
formulas assume that the risk of interest tax shields equals the risk of debt. On the
left, future debt can take on any value. On the right, an additional restriction is
imposed that debt (in dollars) remains constant.

LEVERED COST OF EQUITY
In certain situations, you will have already estimated the unlevered cost of equity
and need to relever the cost of equity to a new target structure. In this case, use
equation 2 to solve for the levered cost of equity, ke:

Vu

V

D

E

( ku ) + V +txaV ( ktxa ) = D + E ( kd ) + D + E ( ke )
V +V
u

txa

u

txa

Multiply both sides by enterprise value:

Vu ( ku ) + Vtxa ( ktxa ) = D ( kd ) + E ( ke )

722

APPENDIX D

Next, move D(kd) to the opposite side of the equation and divide the entire equation by the market value of equity, E:

ke =

Vu

V

D

txa
ku ) − ( kd ) +
(
( ktxa )
E
E
E

To eliminate Vu from the left side of the equation, rearrange equation 1 to
Vu = D − Vtxa + E, and use this identity to replace Vu:

ke =

D − Vtxa + E
E

V

D

( ku ) − E ( kd ) + Etxa ( ktxa )

Distribute the first fraction into its component parts:

ke = ku −

Vtxa

D

D

V

( ku ) + E ( ku ) − E ( kd ) + Etxa ( ktxa )
E

(5)

and consolidate terms. This leads to the general equation for the cost
of equity.

ke = ku +

Vtxa
D
(ku − kd ) −
(ku − ktxa )
E
E

(6)

If debt is a constant proportion of enterprise value (i.e., debt grows as the business
grows), ku will equal ktxa, and the final term drops out:

ke = k u +

D
(k u − kd )
E

Levered Cost of Equity When ktxa Equals kd
The same analysis can be repeated under the assumption that the risk of interest
tax shields equals the risk of debt. Rather than repeat the first few steps, we start
with equation 5:

ke = ku −

Vtxa

D

D

V

D

D

V

( ku ) + E ( ku ) − E ( kd ) + Etxa ( ktxa )
E

To solve for ke, we replace ktxa with kd:

ke = ku −
and consolidate like terms:

Vtxa

( ku ) + E ( ku ) − E ( kd ) + Etxa ( kd )
E

APPENDIX D

ke = ku +

D − Vtxa
E

( ku ) −

D − Vtxa
E

723

( kd )

Finally, we further simplify the equation by once again combining like terms:

ke = ku +

D − Vtxa
E

(ku − kd )

We now have the levered cost of equity for a company whose debt can take any
value but whose interest tax shields have the same risk as the company’s debt.
Exhibit D.2 on page 712 summarizes the formulas that can be used to estimate the levered cost of equity. The top row in the exhibit contains formulas that
assume ktxa equals ku. The bottom row contains formulas that assume ktxa equals
kd. The formulas on the left side are flexible enough to handle any future capital
structure but require valuing the tax shields separately. The formulas on the
right side assume the dollar level of debt is fixed over time.

LEVERED BETA
Similar to the cost of capital, the weighted average beta of a company’s assets, both
operating and financial, must equal the weighted average beta of its financial
claims:

Vu

V

D

E

(βu ) + V +txaV (βtxa ) = D + E (βd ) + D + E (βe )
V +V
u

txa

u

txa

724

APPENDIX D

Since the form of this equation is identical to the cost of capital, we can rearrange
the formula using the same process as previously described. Rather than repeat the
analysis, we provide a summary of levered beta in Exhibit D.3. As expected, the
first two columns are identical in form to Exhibit D.2, except that the beta (β) replaces the cost of capital (k).
By using beta, we can make one additional simplification. If debt is risk free,
the beta of debt is 0, and βd drops out. This allows us to convert the following general equation (when βtxa equals βu):

βe = βu +

D
(βu − βd )
E

into the following:

D

βe =  1 +  βu

E
This last equation is an often-applied formula for levering (and unlevering)
beta when the risk of interest tax shields equals the risk of operating assets and the
company’s debt is risk free. For investment grade companies, debt is near risk free,
so any errors using this formula will be small. If the company is highly leveraged,
however, errors can be large. In this situation, estimate the beta of debt, and use
the more general version of the formula.

APPENDIX

E

Leverage and the PriceEarnings Multiple
This appendix demonstrates that the P/E ratio of a levered company depends on
its unlevered (all-equity) P/E ratio, its cost of debt, and its leverage ratio. When
the unlevered P/E ratio is less than 1/kd (where kd equals the cost of debt), the P/E
ratio falls as leverage rises. Conversely, when the unlevered P/E is greater than
1/kd, the P/E ratio rises with increased leverage.
In this proof we assume the company faces no taxes and no distress costs. We
do this to avoid modeling the complex relationship between debt-to-value and enterprise value. Instead, our goal is to show that there is a systematic relation between debt-to-value and the price-earnings ratio.

STEP 1
To build the relation between P/Es and leverage, start with the definition of an unlevered P/E ratio (PEu). When the company is entirely financed with equity, its enterprise value equals its equity value, and its NOPLAT equals its net income:

PEu =

VENT
NOPLATt+1

This equation can be rearranged to solve for the enterprise value, which we will
use in the next step:

VENT = NOPLATt+1 × PEu

(1)

STEP 2
Next, we define net income as a function of NOPLAT. For a company with leverage,
net income equals NOPLAT less interest payments. The amount of interest equals
725

726

APPENDIX E

the cost of debt times the amount of debt, which can be defined by multiplying enterprise value by the debt-to-value ratio:

 D
NIt+1 = NOPLATt+1 − VENT   kd
V
At this point, we substitute equation 1 for the enterprise value,

 D
NIt+1 = NOPLATt+1 − NOPLATt+1 ( PEu )   kd
V
and factor NOPLAT into a single term:

 D
NIt+1 = NOPLATt+1 (1 − ( PEu )   kd )
V

(2)

STEP 3
At this point, we are ready to solve for the company’s price-to-earnings ratio. Since
price-to-earnings is based on equity values, we first convert enterprise value to equity value. To do this, we once again start with equation 1:

VENT = NOPLATt+1 × PEu
This time, however, we focus on the value of equity. Thus, to convert enterprise
value into equity value, we multiply both sides by 1 minus the debt-to-value ratio
(which equals the equity-to-value ratio):

D
D


VENT  1 −  = NOPLATt+1 × PEu ×  1 − 


V
V
Next, we use equation 2 to eliminate NOPLAT:

E=

D

NIt+1 × PEu ×  1 − 

V
 D
1 − ( PEu )   kd
V

Dividing both sides by net income results in the levered P/E ratio:

E
=
NIt+1

 D
PEu − PEu  
V
 D
1 − ( PEu )   kd
V

At this point, we have a relation between equity value and net income, which
depends on the unlevered P/E, the debt-to-value ratio, and the cost of debt. Debt to

APPENDIX E

727

value, however, is in both the numerator and the denominator, so it is difficult to
distinguish how leverage affects the levered P/E ratio. To eliminate the debt-tovalue ratio in the numerator, we use a few algebraic tricks. First, we multiply both
the numerator and denominator by kd:

E
=
NIt+1

 D
PEu kd − PEu   kd
V

 D 
kd  1 − ( PEu )   kd 
V 


Next, we subtract and add 1 (a net difference of 0) in the numerator:

E
=
NIt+1

( PE k − 1) +  1 − PE  VD  k 
u

d

u

d


 D 
kd  1 − ( PEu )   kd 
V 


After separating the numerator into two distinct terms, we can eliminate the components of the right-hand term by canceling them with the denominator. This allows us to remove debt to value from the numerator:

E
=
NIt+1

( PE k − 1)
u

d


 D 
kd  1 − ( PEu )   kd 
V 


+

1
kd

Next, we divide both the numerator and denominator of the first term by kd:

E
1
=
+
NIt+1 kd

PEu −

1
kd

 D
1 − ( PEu )   kd
V

Finally, we multiply the numerator and denominator of the second term by −1:

1
− PEu
kd
E
1
=
+
NIt+1 kd  D 
  kd ( PEu ) − 1
V
As seen in the above expression, a company’s P/E ratio is a function of its unlevered P/E ratio, its cost of debt, and its debt-to-value ratio. When the unlevered
P/E ratio equals the reciprocal of the cost of debt, the numerator of the fraction
equals zero, and leverage has no effect on the P/E ratio. For companies with large
unlevered P/Es, P/E systematically increases with leverage. Conversely, companies with small unlevered P/Es would exhibit a drop as leverage rises.

Index
Abandonment option, 566
Accountability,
compensation/
remuneration and,
43 – 44, 435
Accounting:
changes/irregularities
(analyzing historical
performance),
194 –195
financial institutions,
issues for, 685 –686
goodwill, 83 –85, 593,
595 –597
insurance companies
(GAAP for SEC and
statutory for state
regulators), 698,
699–700, 701
international differences,
591–599
balance sheet assets/
liabilities, 593
consolidation, 592–594
derivatives and hedge
accounting, 593,
597–598
employee stock options,
593, 594
financial assets, 593, 597
goodwill, 593, 595 –597
income statement, 593
intangible assets, 593,
596
inventory, 593, 595
leases, 593, 595
overview table, 593

pensions/
postemployment
benefits, 593,
598–599
principals, 593
provisions, 593, 598
revenue recognition, 593,
594
tangible fixed assets,
593, 595
translation, 593, 594
inventory (LIFO/FIFO),
82, 86 –87, 88, 593, 595
mergers & acquisitions,
focus on value creation
versus focus on,
457– 458
statements (see Financial
statements)
stock market and
differences in, 82–88
stock options, 86
U.S. GAAP reconciliations,
no clear impact of, 83
Adjusted present value (APV)
model, 104, 121–127
algebraic proof of
equivalence to
enterprise DCF and
cash-f low-to-equity
valuation, 715, 717–718
assessment, 104
discount factor (unlevered
cost of equity), 104
emerging markets, 646
measure (free cash f low),
104

overview, 104
valuing free cash f low at
unlevered cost of
equity, 124 –126
valuing tax shields and
other capital structure
effects, 126 –127
Advertising (expensed
invest ment), 201–203
Agere Systems, 484, 485
Airline industry, 140, 254
Amazon.com, 16, 72, 389,
659–668
Amgen, 143, 144
Anders, William A., 468
AOCI (accumulated other
comprehensive income),
175
AOL, 72, 381, 444, 531
APV-based valuation. See
Adjusted present value
(APV) model
Arbitrage, 89, 93
Arbitrage pricing theory, 323
Asia penalty, 14
AT&T, 472, 484, 485
Autocorrelation, 306, 307
Balanced scorecard, 402
Balance sheets:
accounting differences,
international, 593
banks, 693
forecasting, 237, 247, 248,
251–252, 693
Heineken, 217, 260, 265
historical, 217, 245, 693

729

730

INDEX

Balance sheets (Continued)
insurance companies,
700–701, 704
Bankruptcy, 489
Banks, 686 –698
basic bank economics,
688–690
business unit structure,
697
capital structure, 692
cash f lows and valuation,
696
valuing from outside in,
690–697
valuing from the inside,
697–698
Barnes & Noble, 660, 661
Bear market (1999–2002), 10,
11–12
Beer industry, 224 –230, 336.
See also Heineken
capital turnover analysis
(2003), 228
credit ratios, 230
national market share, 225
stock market performance,
229
unlevered betas, 336
value drivers, 227
value multiples, 230
worldwide growth, 224
Benchmarking, 430– 431
Best Buy, 372, 382, 385,
398–399, 408– 409, 660,
661, 663
Beta(s):
beer industry (unlevered),
336
by bond class, 1990–2000,
327
cross-border valuations,
610–612
in defense of, 323 –324
estimates of; smoothing,
320–321
estimating beta
(estimating cost
of capital), 312–319
industry, 317–319
levered (and cost of
equity), 723 –724
measuring with/without
TMT bubble years, 317
smoothing, 320–321
Black, Fischer, 132
Blume, Marshall, 308
Boeing, 18, 238

Bond(s):
beta, 327
government, 304
inf lation-indexed, 256
ratings, 325 –326, 497
BP Amoco, 239
Brealey, Richard, 373
Browne, Lord (CEO of British
Petroleum), 419
Bubbles:
European markets, 12–13
Internet (late 1990s),
16 –18, 94 –98, 317, 393
LBO, 15 –16
Bull market (1980–1999), 3,
8–10
Capital asset pricing model
(CAPM), 300–312, 313
emerging markets, 641
forward-looking models,
310–312
historical market risk
premium, 304 –309
market risk premium,
estimating, 303 –304
market risk regressions,
309–310
real/nominal expected
market returns, 312
risk-free rate, estimating,
302–303
Capital cash f low, 104, 128
Capital efficiency, 137–140
Capital productivity
measures, 403
Capital structure, 487–520
banks, 692
credit ratings and, 496 –504
coverage, 498, 500–502
credit spread, 502–503
default probability, 503
leverage, 498–500
market-based rating
approach, 503 –504
solvency, 500
designing/managing (five
steps), 504 –510
estimating cost of capital
and, 329–331
financial engineering,
516 –520
Heineken case, 334
maintaining target,
510–516
setting/optimizing/
targeting, 492– 496

signaling effects, 510–511
transaction costs for equity
and debt financing, 511
valuation, 253
value creation and,
487– 496, 516 –520
value trade-offs, 488– 492
costs of business erosion
and bankruptcy, 489
costs of investor
conf licts, 490– 491
overview graph, 489
pecking-order theory,
491– 492
reduction of corporate
overinvest ment,
488– 489
tax savings, 488
Carve-outs, 478, 481– 483
Cash f low. See also
Discounted cash f low
(DCF); Free cash f low
(FCF)
absence of, DCF analysis
in, 655 (see also Highgrowth companies)
analysis (capital structure),
496
banks, valuation of, 696
currency, foreign/
domestic, forecasting
in, 605 –610
financial institutions,
forecasting, 684 –685
f lexibility and, 565
Heineken, 220, 268
historical performance
analysis, 181, 183, 220
insurance companies,
valuation of, 707
real, 131
volatility, impact of (crossborder valuations), 619
Cash f low from operations
(CFO), 162
Cash f low return on
invest ment (CFROI),
213 –215
CFO’s role, reshaping, 44 – 45
Change-of-ownership
transactions, 437. See also
Divestitures; Mergers
and acquisitions (M&A)
Chemco (disguised example,
investor
communications),
525 –526, 529

INDEX

Chemicals, ROIC and
invest ment rate
(1980–2001), 678
Chrysler, 489
Circuit City, 372, 382, 385
Cisco, 9, 301, 450
Coca-Cola, 137, 286 –287, 645
Colgate-Palmolive, 645
Comparables, 331–332,
372–373
Compensation/remuneration,
43 – 44, 435
Connors, John, 533 –534
Consolidation, international
accounting differences,
592–594
ConsuCo, 622, 632–634,
639–640, 643 –646,
649–651
Consumer price index,
expected inf lation versus
growth in, 256
Contingent liabilities, 352
Continuing value,
estimating, 112–113,
275 –294
advanced formulas for,
291–293
discounted cash f low
approaches:
aggressive-growth
formula, 289
convergence formula,
288
formula recommended
for, 277–279
economic profit valuation,
formula recommended
for, 280
enterprise DCF model,
111–114
evaluating approaches to,
287–291
financial institutions,
686 –687
Heineken case, 293 –294
non-cash-f low approaches,
290–291
liquidation value, 291
multiples, 290–291
replacement cost, 291
pitfalls, common:
naive base-year
extrapolation,
285 –286
naive overconservatism,
286 –287

purposeful
overconservatism,
287
subtleties of, 281–284
technical considerations,
278
Convergence formula, 288
Convertible debt, 355 –357,
519
Convertible preferred stock,
519
Core growth/value investor
types, 538
Corporate raiders, 15
Cost(s):
competitiveness, 137
deadweight, 123
distress, 123
fixed versus variable,
254 –255
structure health measures,
404
synergies, estimating,
446 – 449
Cost of capital, 297–336. See
also Weighted average
cost of capital (WAAC)
beta, in defense of, 323 –324
capital structure, 329–333
cross-border valuations,
606
emerging markets, 640–648
estimating after-tax cost of
debt, 324 –328
estimating cost of equity,
300–324
arbitrage pricing theory,
323
capital asset pricing
model (CAPM),
300–312
estimating beta, 312–314,
317–321
Fama-French ThreeFactor Model,
321–323
frequency of
measurement,
314 –316
Internet bubble distorted
the market portfolio,
317
market portfolio,
316 –317
measurement period, 314
in foreign currency,
610–612

731

Heineken case, 333 –336
target weights, 328–332
Cost of equity. See also Equity
estimating (see Cost of
capital, estimating cost
of equity)
levered, 721–723
unlevered, 104, 124 –126,
319, 719–721
Cost of goods sold (COGS),
185
Country risk premium,
635 –637, 646 –648,
650–652
Coverage, 197, 498
Coyne, Kevin, 536, 538,
541–542
Credit rating, 492, 496 –504
capital structure and,
496 –504
coverage and, 498, 500–502
credit spread and,
502–503
default probability and
credit spread, 503
larger companies, 492
leverage and, 498–500
market-based rating
approach, 503 –504
setting target for, 505 –506
solvency and, 500
Cross-border valuations,
591–620
accounting differences,
international, 591–599
balance sheet assets, 593
balance sheet liabilities,
593
consolidation, 592–594
derivatives and hedge
accounting, 593,
597–598
employee stock options,
593, 594
financial assets, 593, 597
goodwill, 593, 595 –597
income statement, 593
intangible assets, 593,
596
inventory, 593, 595
leases, 593, 595
overview table, 593
pensions/
postemployment
benefits, 593,
598–599
principals, 593

732

INDEX

Cross-border valuations
(Continued)
provisions, 593, 598
revenue recognition, 593,
594
tangible fixed assets,
593, 595
translation, 593, 594
estimating cost of capital
in foreign currency,
610–612
forecasting cash f lows in
foreign and domestic
currency, 605 –610
foreign-currency risk,
612–619
taxation, international,
599–603
translation of foreigncurrency financial
statements, 603 –605
Currency, foreign:
emerging markets, 622–624
estimating cost of capital
in, 610–612
financial statements,
translation of, 603 –605
forecasting cash f lows,
605 –610
forward-rate method, 607,
608
risk, 612–619
spot-rate method, 607, 608
Currency-based
restatements, 182
Currency effects, 192–193
Cyclical companies, 671–679
earnings forecasts,
673 –675
management implications,
677–679
market smarter than
consensus forecast,
675 –676
relative returns from
capital expenditure
timing, 679
ROIC and invest ment rate in
commodity chemicals
(1980–2001), 678
share price behavior, 671
theory conf licting with
reality, 671–672, 673
valuation approach,
676 –677
when the cycle changes,
675

DAC assets (deferred
acquisition costs), 700,
701
DCF. See Discounted cash
f low (DCF)
Deadweight costs, 123
DeBondt, Werner, 88
Debt:
below-invest ment-grade,
326 –327
capital structure,
maintaining, 513, 516
convertible, 519
cost of, 324 –328, 335
enterprise DCF model,
116
equivalents, 174 –175, 330,
352
estimating cost of capital,
324 –328, 329–330
Heineken, 263, 334, 335
historical performance
analysis, 174 –175, 184
insurance companies, 701
issuing, 184, 513
liquid, accounting for, 115
repayments, 516
valuation, calculating and
interpreting results,
347–348
Debt-to-market value by
industry (2003), 331
Decay rates, ROIC, 150–152
Decision tree analysis (DTA),
560, 571–572
numerical example,
581–589
ROV comparison, 560,
572–576
uncertainty and value,
561–566
Deep value investors, 538
Dell, 18, 658, 660, 661, 664,
666
Depreciation, 242–243, 261
Derivatives, 517–518, 593,
597–598
Deutsche Telekom’s
T-Online, 483
Deviations, market, 15 –20,
87–98
associated with sloppy
economic analysis,
15 –18
bubbles, 15 –18, 94 –99
changes in corporate
governance and

shareholder inf luence,
18–19
key conditions for, 89–90
market overreaction and
underreaction,
reversal and
momentum, 90–92
Discontinued operations, 346
Discounted cash f low (DCF):
alternatives to, 132–133
analysis when no cash
f low, 655 (see also
High-growth
companies)
approaches, 131–132
case illustration (Fred’s
Hardware), 50
continuing value,
recommended formula,
277–279
drivers of cash f low and
value, 56 –60
equivalences, 51, 63 –65,
713 –714, 715 –718
extended model, two-stage
version, 94 –95
fundamental principles,
54 –63
intuition behind, 55 –56
recommended use of, 99
valuation models,
overview, 104 (see also
specific models)
adjusted present value,
104, 121–127
capital cash f low, 104,
127–128
economic profit, 104,
118–121
enterprise discounted
cash f low, 104 –118
equity cash f low, 104,
128–130
Zen of corporate finance,
61–63
Disney Company, 18
Distress costs, 123
Divestitures, 465 – 485
business positioning and,
474 – 475
carve-outs, 478, 481– 483
deciding on, 476 – 478
earnings dilution through
portfolio management,
469
forms of, 478– 479
initial public offerings, 478

INDEX

joint ventures, 478
life cycle of a business and,
472
market-adjusted
announcement returns
of, 467
parent and business unit
fit, 475 – 476
parent company use of
proceeds, 470
private/public
transactions, 478– 479
spin-offs, 478, 479– 480
split-offs, 478
tracking stock, 479,
483 – 484
trade sales, 478
transaction type decision,
478– 484
value creation from,
470– 474
volume, versus M&A
volume, 466
Dividends:
cutting, 512
Heineken, 220, 261
historical performance
analysis, 184, 199, 220
imputation, 602–603
increases, 513 –514
maintaining targeted
capital structure, 512,
513 –514
payout ratio, 199–200
preferred stock, 351–352
shareholders in different
countries, 602–603
DTA. See Decision tree
analysis (DTA)
DVRs (digital video
recorders) market,
239–240
Earnings:
dilution through portfolio
management, 469
guidance, investor
communications, 535
retained, statement of, 251
surprises, tail effects
driving reaction, 533
Earnings per share (EPS)
game, 78
EBITA (earnings before
interest, taxes, and
amortization), 132, 492.
See also Multiples

EBITDAR (earnings before
interest, taxes,
depreciation,
amortization, and rental
expenses), 197. See also
Multiples
Economic profit:
discounted free cash f low
equivalence, 713 –714
estimation, financial
institutions,
686 –687
Heineken case, 221, 269
historical performance
analysis, 185, 221
and key value driver
formula, 711–712
valuation models based on,
104 –105, 118–121
Economic value added (EVA),
417– 418
Electronic Data Systems
(EDS), 154 –155
EMC Corporation, 9, 97
Emerging markets, 621–652
ConsuCo, 622, 632–634,
639–640, 643 –646,
648–652
estimating cost of capital
in, 640–648
beta, 643 –644
debt, estimating aftertax cost of, 644 –645
estimating cost of equity,
642–644
estimating country risk
premium, 646 –648
fundamental
assumptions,
641–642
market risk premium,
644
risk-free rate, 642–643
WACC, estimating, 646
exchange rates, inf lation,
and interest rate gaps,
622–624
inf lation, and historical
analysis and forecasts,
624 –634
financial projections in
real and nominal
terms, 626 –627
historical analysis,
624 –626
step 1: forecasting
operating

733

performance in real
terms, 627–628
step 2: building financial
statements in
nominal terms,
628–629
step 3: building
financial
statements in real
terms, 630
step 4: forecasting future
free cash f lows in
real and nominal
terms from the
projected income
statements and
balance sheets,
630–631
step 5: estimating DCF
value in real and
nominal terms,
631–632
triangulating with
multiples and country
risk premium
approach, 650–652
valuation, incorporating
risks into, 634 –640
constructing cash f low
scenarios and
probabilities,
638–639
country risk premium
DCF approach,
635 –637
scenario DCF approach,
635
scenario DCF as prime
valuation approach,
637–638
valuation results,
calculating/
interpreting,
648–652
Employee stock options. See
Stock options
Enron, 116
Enterprise discounted cash
f low, 104 –118
algebraic proof of
equivalence,
715 –718
equity, valuing, 117–118
examples, 105, 106 –111
nonequity claims,
identifying/valuing,
115 –117

734

INDEX

Enterprise discounted cash
f low (Continued)
nonoperating assets,
identifying/
valuing, 114 –115
operations, valuing,
108–114
overview, 104
provisions, 209
Enterprise resource planning
(ERP) system, 446
Enterprise-value multiples,
379–381
EPS (earnings per share)
game, 78
Equity:
changes in:
banks, 694
insurance companies,
705
cost of (see Cost of equity)
equivalents, 175
estimating current capital
structure, 330–331
historical performance
analysis, 175
issuing, 512
valuing (enterprise DCF
model), 117–118
Equity cash f low (valuation
model):
financial institutions,
681–687
overview, 104, 128–130
Equity value, calculating,
341–357
convertible debt, 355 –357
debt, 347–348
debt equivalents, 352
employee stock options,
352–355
minority interests, 357
nonequity claims, 347–357
operating leases, 348
postretirement liabilities,
348–351
preferred equity, 351–352
Europe, 12–13, 19, 302
EVA. See Economic value
added (EVA)
EV/EBITA (enterprise-valueto-earnings before
interest, taxes, and
amortization), 132, 492.
See also Multiples
Event bettors, 538
Excess cash, 114 –115, 173,
221, 343, 381–382

Excess real estate, 346
Exercise value approach,
353 –354
Expectations, changes in
(and total returns to
sharedholders), 76 –77
Expectations treadmill,
407– 411
Expected market returns,
real/nominal, 311–312
Expensed invest ment,
201–203
Fama, Eugene, 91, 321
Fama-French Three-Factor
Model, 321–323
Financial addicts, 539
Financial distress, 347
Financial engineering,
516 –520
Financial institutions,
681–709
accounting issues, 685 –686
banks, 686 –698
basic bank economics,
688–690
business unit structure,
697
capital structure, 692
cash f lows and
valuation, 696
valuing from outside in,
690–697
valuing from the inside,
697–698
continuing-value formula,
686 –687
economic profit estimation,
686 –687
equity cash f low approach
to valuation, 681–687
equity needs,
understanding,
683 –684
forecasting equity cash
f lows, 684 –685
goodwill, 685 –686
insurance companies,
698–709 (see also
Insurance companies)
risk capital versus book
equity, 683 –684
Financial statements. See also
Balance sheets; Income
statements
business unit, 548–554
emerging markets,
628–629, 630

reorganization:
Heineken, 216 –223, 236
key concepts, 162–167
in practice, 167–184
translation of foreigncurrency, 603 –605
worksheets, 235, 236
Financing sources, 252
Flexibility, 559–589
classifying in terms of real
options, 566 –568
drivers of, 563 –566
valuation examples,
577–589
valuation methods, 560,
568–571
comparison of DTA and
ROV, 560, 572–576
decision tree analysis
(DTA), 560,
571–572
real-option valuation
(ROV), 560,
568–571
valuation process, fourstep, 576 –577
value and, 561–566
Follow-on (compound)
options, 566 –567
Ford Motor Company, 518
Forecasting, 233 –273
components of a good
model, 234 –236
determining length/detail
of forecast, 233 –234
financial institutions,
equity cash f lows,
684 –685
fixed versus variable costs
and, 254 –255
foreign/domestic currency
cash f lows, 605 –610
Heineken case, 257–264
inf lation and, 255 –257
mechanics (six steps),
236 –253
overview, 236 –237
step 1: preparing/
analyzing historical
financials, 237–239
step 2: building revenue
forecast, 237,
239–240
step 3: forecasting
income statement,
237, 240–246
step 4: forecasting
invested capital and

INDEX

nonoperating assets,
237, 247–251
step 5: forecasting
investor funds, 237,
251–253
step 6: calculating ROIC
and FCF, 237, 253
nonfinancial operating
drivers and, 254
using theory and data to
drive better forecasts,
159–160
Foreign currency. See
Currency, foreign
France Telecom, 481, 483
Fred’s Hardware (case
illustration, value
creation), 47–54
Free cash f low (FCF), 166 –167,
180–184, 236, 237, 253. See
also Cash f low
defined/formula for, 162
forecasting, and, 236, 237,
253
key concepts, 166 –167
in practice, 180–184
in Zen formula, 61
Free-cash-f low hypothesis,
488
Free-rider problem, 445
French, Kenneth, 91, 321
Fundamental analysts/
investors, 538, 541
Funding shortages,
managing, 513 –516
Funding surpluses,
managing, 513 –516
g (growth), 61
Gardner, David, 373
Gardner, Tom, 373
GE Capital, 550
General Dynamics, 468
General Electric, 9, 404, 432,
460, 547
General Mills, 301
General Motors, 116, 174,
518
German Eurobond, 302
Glassman, James (and Kevin
Hassett, Dow 36,000: The
New Strategy for Profiting
from the Coming Rise in
the Stock Market), 9
GlaxoSmithKline, 532
Goodwill:
amortization eliminated,
83 –85, 262, 457

financial institutions,
685 –686
forecasting and, 249–250,
262–263
Heineken, 219, 262–263
historical performance
analysis, 170–171, 182,
185 –186, 219
international accounting
differences, 593,
595 –597
share price, and treat ment
of, 83 –85
Governance, corporate;
changes in, 18–19
Government:
bonds, 304
strip yields (December
2003), 303
Treasuries, 326
Growth:
continuing value and
279
empirical analysis of,
153 –159
Heineken, 226 –228
historical performance
analysis, 191–196
invest ment styles, 538
multiples driven by,
373 –375
organic, versus M&A (as
strategy), 440– 442
return on invested capital
by size and, 147–150
transition probability
(1994 –2003), 159
valuation levels driven by
long-term ROIC and,
73 –75
Growth at a reasonable price
(GARP), 538
Growth companies. See Highgrowth companies,
valuing
Growth investors, 538
Health metrics, 395, 401– 406
Hedge accounting,
international
differences, 593,
597–598
Hedge funds, 537
Heineken:
cash f low, historical/
projected, 57, 220, 268
continuing value,
estimating, 293 –294

735

cost of capital, estimating,
333 –336
currency risk exposure,
618
forecasting performance,
257–273
creating scenarios,
257–258
five-year forecast,
258–264
medium-term forecast
(2003 –2018), 264 –265
reasonableness check, 265
sample forecasts,
265 –273
historical performance
analysis, 215 –230
growth and ROIC,
226 –228
industry background,
224 –225
reorganization of the
financial statements,
216 –223
stock market
performance,
228–230
valuation, calculating/
interpreting results of,
363 –368
DCF valuation, 364
economic profit
valuation, 365
equity valuation, 366
scenarios, 364 –368
sensitivity analysis, 368
Hidden assets, 172, 176 –177
High-growth companies,
valuing, 655 –669
Amazon.com, valuing,
then and now, 667–668
scenarios created in
1999, 667
stock price volatility, 668
DCF analysis when no cash
f low, 655
uncertainty, certainty of,
668–669
valuation process, 657–667
scenario development,
663 –665
scenario weighting,
665 –667
starting from the future,
658–662
working backward to
current performance,
662–663

736

INDEX

Historical performance,
analyzing, 161–230, 395
advanced issues, 199
alternative measure: cash
f low return on
invest ment (CFROI),
213 –215
credit health and capital
structure, 197–199
employee stock options,
203 –205
enterprise DCF model,
108–110
expensed invest ment
(advertising and R&D),
201–203
forecasting performance
and, 159, 235, 236 –239
free cash f low, 159, 165,
166 –167, 180–184
general considerations for,
199
Heineken case, 215 –230
inf lation and, 212–213
invested capital, 163 –164,
167–175
leverage, danger/power of,
198
market versus bookinvested capital, 213
minority interest, 212
NOPLAT, 164 –166, 176 –179
operating leases, 199–201
provisions and reserves,
205 –210
reorganizing the
accounting statements:
key concepts, 162–167
in practice, 167–184
retirement benefits, 210–212
revenue growth, analyzing,
191–196
ROIC, 162, 166, 184 –191
Home Depot:
beta, 316, 320, 322
CFROI, 214 –215
change in equity value for,
412
cost of capital, estimating,
299–300, 313, 317, 319,
322, 323, 325, 326
credit rating, 325, 326
discount relative to peers,
376
economic profit, 119, 120,
187
employee stock options,
203, 204

historical performance
analysis, 168–181, 185,
187, 188, 190, 196 –198,
199–203, 214 –215
multiples for valuation,
372, 376, 377, 382, 383,
385, 386, 387
MVA, 408
performance
measurement, 393, 397,
398, 399, 403, 404 – 405,
408, 409, 411– 413
rental expenses, 200–201
revenue growth, 197, 658,
666
SIC code, 377
stock returns versus S&P
512 returns
(1999–2003), 313
valuation frameworks,
106 –107, 109–114, 117,
119, 120, 123, 127, 129,
130
warranties, 172
weighted average cost of
capital (WACC), 114,
298–300
Horizon of analysis, 538
Hubris, 445
Hybrid financing, 519–520
IBM, 97, 191–194, 315, 514
Illiquid invest ments, 173 –174
Income model, banks, 688
Income smoothing
provisions, 205, 209–210
Income statements:
accounting differences,
international, 593
banks (historical/forecast),
691
forecasting, 237, 240–246
Heineken (historical/
forecast), 216, 264
insurance companies,
698–700
Income value investors, 538
Index investors, 538
Industry groups:
codes, 377
interest coverage and
credit rating for
selected sectors,
502–503
return on invested capital
by, 147–150
revenue growth by, 155
ROIC by, 148

Inf lation:
currency translation, 605
emerging markets, 622–632
forecasting performance,
255 –257, 626 –632
historical performance
analysis, 212–213,
624 –626
interest rates and, 609,
622–624
Ingersoll, John, 355
Initial public offerings, 478
Innovation, Inc., 284, 285
Institutional investors,
537–541
Insurance companies,
698–709
accounting methods, 698,
699–700, 701
balance sheet, 700–701
case example (“Acme”),
702–708
deferred (policy)
acquisition costs (DAC
assets), 700, 701
income statement, 698–700
valuation implications,
702–708
valuing from the inside,
708–709
Intangible assets, 170–171,
182, 593, 596. See also
Goodwill
Intel, 76
Interest coverage ratio, 197
Interest expense/income,
183 –184, 244 –245, 261
Interest rates, inf lation and,
609, 622–624
Interest tax shield (ITS), 127
International accounting
differences, 591–599
balance sheet assets, 593
balance sheet liabilities,
593
consolidation, 592–594
derivatives and hedge
accounting, 593,
597–598
employee stock options,
593, 594
financial assets, 593, 597
goodwill, 593, 595 –597
income statement, 593
intangible assets, 593, 596
inventory, 593, 595
leases, 593, 595
overview table, 593

INDEX

pensions/postemployment
benefits, 593,
598–599
principals, 593
provisions, 593, 598
revenue recognition, 593,
594
tangible fixed assets, 593,
595
translation, 593, 594
International taxation,
599–603
cross-border taxation,
600–602
dividend imputation,
602–603
example of tax calculation
for a U.S. company
with/without foreign
tax credits, 601
fiscal grouping, 600
relevant tax rate and
taxable income,
599–600
International valuations. See
Cross-border valuations
Internet bubble, 16 –18,
94 –98, 317, 393. See also
High-growth companies
Intrinsic value:
deviations from, 87–98
estimations, median
companies in U.S.
stock market
(1963 –2003), 7–8
market value versus,
443 – 444, 524 –527
Inventory accounting, 82,
86 –87, 88, 593, 595
Invested capital:
case illustration
(Heineken), 219, 267
estimation, multibusiness
companies, 553 –554
forecasting, 247–251, 267
historical performance
analysis, 163 –164,
167–175, 219
in practice, 167–175
return on (see ROIC
(return on invested
capital))
in Zen formula, 61
Invest ment(s):
costs (driver of f lexibility),
565
gross, 180–183
illiquid, 115, 343 –345

insurance companies,
valuation of,
700
option to defer, 566
Invest ment rate (IR):
in Zen formula, 61
Investor(s):
behavior, and market
deviations, 89
conf lict, costs of, 490– 491
types/categories, 535 –542
Investor communications,
523 –542
alignment of message and
strategy, 527–529
disguised case
illustrations:
Chemco, 525 –526, 529
Newtech, 539, 540–541
PharmaCo, 526 –527
intrinsic value versus
market value, 524 –527
strategy, in case
illustration, 44
transparency, 529–535
Investor funds, forecasting,
251–253
Irrational investor behavior,
89
Joint ventures, 478
Kaplan, Robert, 401– 402
Kothari, S. P., 324
Lands’ End, 660, 661
Leases, operating, 116,
174 –175, 182, 348, 593,
595
Leverage:
capital structure and credit
rating, 498–500
cost of equity and, 719–724
beta, levered, 723 –724
beta, unlevered, 336
levered cost of equity,
721–723
unlevered cost of equity,
104, 124 –126,
719–721
danger/power of, 198
Heineken case, 230
P/E and, 380, 725 –727
Leveraged-buyouts (LBOs),
15 –16, 298
Life cycle of a business, three
phases, 472
Life insurer, 708

737

LIFO/FIFO. See Inventory
accounting
Line item analysis/
forecasting, 189, 240
Liquidation value, 291
Loan losses, banks, 689–690
Lockheed Martin, 210–212
Lowe’s:
enterprise DCF model,
108–110, 111
historical performance
analysis, 108–110, 168,
169, 171, 176, 177, 181,
185, 187, 201
multiples, 372, 373, 375,
382, 383, 385
performance
measurement, 397, 398,
399, 409, 410
Lucent, 472, 484, 485
Marked to market, 182
Market. See Stock market
Market-activated corporate
strategy (MACS)
framework, 475 – 476
Market portfolio, 316 –317
Market value added (MVA),
408, 409, 413
Market value versus
intrinsic value, 443 – 444,
524 –527
McDonald’s Corporation, 517
Media sales/forecast, North
American, 659, 660
Megacapitalization stocks, 9
Merck, 202, 203, 239, 515
Mergers and acquisitions
(M&A), 437– 462
alternatives to acquisition,
454
focus on value creation,
not accounting,
457– 458
framework for creating
value through,
442– 446
free-rider problem, 445
goodwill, treat ment of, 219
Heineken, 219
historical performance
analysis, 193 –194, 219
hubris, 445
implementation tracking,
462
implied performance
improvement in
premium paid, 454

738

INDEX

Mergers and acquisitions
(M&A) (Continued)
integration process, 461
market value versus
intrinsic value,
443 – 444
payment (cash versus
stock), 455 – 457
reporting standards, and
revenue growth from,
153
as strategy, versus organic
growth, 440– 442
success factors, 459– 462
synergies, estimating/
capturing, 444 – 454
value-creating versus
value-destroying
transactions,
characteristics,
439– 440
value creation and,
438– 440, 441
volume (versus
divestitures), 466
waves of acquisitions
(since 1968), 438
Merton, Robert, 132, 314
Microsoft:
market valuations and
fundamentals, 98
network effects, Microsoft
Office software
example, 17
new segment reporting, 531
revenue growth, 658, 666
share repurchases, 516
transparency, 531, 533 –534
Miller, Merton, 104, 122–124,
318, 719–720
Mind-set, value creation,
419– 420
Minority interests, 117, 212,
261, 263, 331, 357
Mitchell, Mark, 439
Modigliani, Franco, 104,
122–124, 318, 719–720
Momentum investors, 538
Motley Fool, The, 373
Multibusiness companies,
106, 528, 547–557
cost of capital, estimating,
by business unit,
554 –556
creating business unit
financial statements,
548–554

outside-in valuation with
public data, 552–554
Multiples, 371–390
as alternative to
discounted cash f low,
132–133
alternatives to EBITA/
EBITDA, 384 –389
best practices for using,
375 –384
comparables analysis
example, 372–373
continuing value, 290–291
emerging markets,
650–652
fundamental principles,
65 –67
nonconsolidated
subsidiaries, 343 –344
PEG ratios, 386 –388
price-to-sales, 385 –386
MVA. See Market value
added (MVA)
Myers, Stewart, 373
NASDAQ index, 16
NCR, 484, 485
Negotiations, 461
Net capital expenditures,
180–181
Net income, reconciliation to,
179
Net invest ment, in Zen
formula, 61
Net operating losses (NOL),
345
Net operating profit (NOP or
EBITA), 176
Net operating profit less
adjusted taxes. See
NOPLAT (net operating
profit less adjusted
taxes)
Net other long-term
operating assets, 171–172
Net present value (NPV)
approach, 561–568
Netscape Communications,
16
Network effects, 17
NetZero, 388
News forecasters (investor
communications), 538
“Newtech,” 539, 540–541
Non-cash-f low approaches,
continuing value,
290–291

Noncash operating expenses,
180
Nonequity claims, 115 –117,
347–357
contingent liabilities, 116
convertible debt, 355 –357
debt, 116, 347–348
debt equivalents, 352
employee options, 117,
353 –355
enterprise DCF model,
115 –116
minority interests, 117, 357
operating leases, 116, 348
preferred stock/equity,
116, 351–352
provisions, 352 (see also
Provisions)
unfunded retirement
liabilities, 116, 348–351
Nonfinancial analysis,
historical performance,
190–191
Nonfinancial companies:
goodwill and, 146
revenue growth for, 154
ROIC distribution for, 146,
147
Nonfinancial data, multiples,
388–389
Nonfinancial operating
drivers, 254
Nonoperating assets,
173 –174, 250–251,
345 –346
Nonoperating income/gains/
losses, 176, 243 –244
NOPLAT (net operating
profits less adjusted
taxes):
continuing value and, 278
example, 164, 165
Heineken case, 218, 266
historical performance
analysis, 108–110,
164 –166, 176 –179, 180
key value driver formula,
711
multibusiness companies,
552–553
in Zen formula, 61
Norton, David, 401– 402
NPV. See Net present value
(NPV) approach
Off-balance-sheet financing,
518–520

INDEX

Operating assets, formula,
163
Operating cost productivity
metrics, 403
Operating expenses,
forecasting, 242, 261
Operating improvement
scenario, 258
Operating leases, 177, 182,
199–201, 382
Operating ratios, 222, 271
Operating working capital,
169–170, 247–249
Operations, value of,
108–114, 339–341
Option(s):
employee stock, 117,
203 –205, 353 –355, 382
real, 132–133, 566 –568 (see
also Real-option
valuation (ROV)
approach (valuing
f lexibility))
valuation approaches, 355
Oracle, 18
Organizational health
metrics, 395, 401– 406
Organization mavens, 539
Output ratios, 695, 706
Overconservatism, naive/
purposeful, 286 –287
Pactiv, 471
Palm/3Com, 92–93, 98
Passive investing, 538
Pecking-order theory,
491– 492
PEG ratios, 386 –388
Pensions. See Retirement
liabilities
Performance, historical. See
Historical performance,
analyzing
Performance management,
415 – 436
accountability in
evaluation and
remuneration, 418,
435 – 436
benchmarks, 431
case illustration,
overhauling business
performance reviews,
43
effective value-based
management, 417– 418
elements, 418

evolution of performance
management systems,
416 – 417
fact-based performance
reviews, 418, 433 – 435
fundamental economic
analysis, 430
metrics, 401, 433 – 434
problem solving, 434 – 435
target setting, effective,
418, 429– 432
theoretical limits, 431– 432
value creation mind-set,
pervasive, 419– 420
value drivers and value
metrics, 420– 429
Performance measurement,
corporate, 393 – 413
case illustration, 42
health of company, 395,
401– 406
historical performance, 395
metrics, 402, 433 – 434
risks, identifying/
analyzing, 406
stock market performance,
395 –396, 406 – 413
expectations treadmill,
407– 411
linking market value and
value creation
potential, 411– 413
value delivered, 396 – 401
Performance ranking, from
worst day to best day,
431
Pharmaceutical industry, 79,
526 –527
Preferred equity/stock, 116,
351–352, 519
Price premium, 137
Price-to-sales multiples,
385 –386
Problem solving, 434 – 435
Procter & Gamble, 518, 547,
610
Production, options to
adjust, 567–568
Provisions, 205 –212, 223, 263
defined, 205
enterprise DCF with, 209
in the financial statements,
206
forecasting, 263
Heineken, 223, 263
historical performance
analysis, 205 –210, 223

739

income smoothing, 205,
209–210
international accounting
differences, 593, 598
long-term operating, 205,
207–208, 210–212
nonoperating, 205
one-time restructuring,
208–209
on-going operating, 205,
206 –207
pensions and
postretirement
medical benefits,
210–212
ROIC with, 207
taxes and, 210
types of, 205
Rappaport, Alfred, 416
RAROC (risk-adjusted
return on capital), 684
Real option(s):
as alternative to
discounted cash f low
(DCF), 132–133
classifying f lexibility in
terms of, 566 –568
Real-option valuation (ROV)
approach (valuing
f lexibility), 560, 568–571
DTA comparison, 572–576
numerical examples,
577–589
Reasonableness check, 265
Receivables and payables,
intercompany, 550, 551
Reed-Elsevier twin shares, 98
Reinvest ment ratio:
historical performance
analysis, 182–183
Remuneration, 43 – 44,
435 – 436
Replacement cost, 291
Research and development
(R&D), 20, 172, 177,
201–203
Reserves:
insurance companies, 701
provisions and, 205 –210
(see also Provisions)
revaluation, Heineken,
219–220
Retailers, major:
hardline (multiples), 372
key value drivers (2003),
661

740

INDEX

Retailers, major (Continued)
performance
measurement, 398, 399,
409, 410
Retail investors, 536
Retirement liabilities:
accounting differences,
international, 593,
598–599
Heineken case, 221, 263,
335
historical performance
analysis and, 174 –175,
210–212
multiples and, 382
prepaid and intangible
assets, 174
unfunded, 116, 348–351
valuation results, 348–351,
382
Return on invested capital.
See ROIC (return on
invested capital)
Revenue:
forecast, building, 237,
239–240
growth (see Growth)
growth projection
(enterprise DCF
model), 110–112
recognition, international
accounting
differences, 593, 594
synergies, estimating,
450– 451
Risk(s):
currency, 612–619
emerging-market,
634 –640
estimating risk-free rate,
302–303
identifying/analyzing
(performance
measurement), 406
market risk premium,
303 –310
RAROC (risk-adjusted
return on capital),
684
Risk capital versus book
equity (financial
institutions), 683 –684
Risk-free interest rate (driver
of f lexibility), 565
Risk-neutral valuation, 570
Risk-weighted assets
(RWAs), 684

ROIC (return on invested
capital):
case illustrations, 42, 48
defined, 42
empirical analysis of,
144 –152
forecast calculations, 236,
237, 253
historical performance
analysis, 162, 166,
184 –191
multiples, 65 –67
valuation levels driven by,
72–75
in Zen formula, 61
RONIC (expected rate of
return on new invested
capital), 278–279
Royal Dutch/Shell Group,
93, 94, 98
Ruback, Richard, 127–128
Run-off triangle, 708
Sales productivity metric,
403
Scenarios, valuation under
multiple, 257–258,
357–361, 663 –667
Scholes, Myron, 132–133
Sears, 398, 399, 400, 409, 410,
661
Securities, marketable,
114 –115, 173, 343
Sell-side analysts, 536
Sensitivity analysis, 362, 368
Shanken, Jay, 324
Shapiro, Carl (and Hall
Varian; Information Rules:
A Strategic Guide to the
Network Economy), 17
Share repurchases, 184,
514 –516
Sharpe, William, 301
Shell Transport & Trading
(T&T), 93
Short-termism, 79
Signaling effects, capital
structure decisions,
510–511
Sirius Satellite Radio, 77–78
Size, return on invested
capital by, 147–150
SLB (Sharpe-Lintner-Black)
CAPM, 321
Sloan, Richard, 324
Southwest Airlines, 137–140,
150

Sovereign risk premium,
646 –647
Spin-offs, 478, 479– 480
Split-offs, 479
Spread model, banks, 689
Stafford, Erik, 439
Stern, Joel, 416
Stern Stewart & Co., 408, 416
Stock market, 5 –14, 71–100
accounting information
and, 82–87
bear market (1999–2002),
10, 11–12
behavior since 1980,
confusing/
frustrating, 3 –5
bull market (1980–1999), 3,
8–10
cautious optimism, 21
crash of 1929, 6
cross-country comparisons,
13 –14
deviations, 15 –18, 87–98
associated with sloppy
economic analysis,
15 –20
bubbles, 12–13, 15 –18,
94 –98, 317, 393
changes in corporate
governance and
shareholder
inf luence, 18–19
key conditions for, 89–90
market overreaction and
underreaction,
reversal and
momentum, 90–92
drivers of value in, 72–73
economic fundamentals
and, 5 –14
efficiency/inefficiency, 88,
98–100
expectations treadmill,
407– 411
fundamentals driving,
71–100
link between market price
levels and
fundamentals, 7–8
long-term focus, 6 –7, 77–82
market overreaction/
underreaction,
reversal and
momentum, 90–92
megacapitalization stocks, 9
performance measurement
and, 395 –396, 406 – 413

INDEX

perspective, need for,
12–13
returns, long-term, 6 –7
shareholder value driven
by return and growth,
72–77
superstars, “New
Economy,” 72
TMT sectors, 11–12, 317
Stock options, 86, 117, 180,
203 –205, 352–355, 382,
593, 594
Strategic health, long-term,
405
Strategy junkies, 539
Strategy/message alignment,
527–529
Subsidiaries, 115, 173 –174,
343 –345, 550–551
Survivorship bias, 309
Sustainability, 140–141, 427
Switching options, 567–568
Synergies (M&A), 444 – 454,
460– 461
capturing, 445 – 446
cost, 446 – 449
estimating, 446 – 454,
460– 461
free-rider problem, 445
hubris, 445
revenue, 450– 451
value creation through,
444 – 445
winner’s curse, 445
Tangible fixed assets:
forecast, Heineken case,
262
international accounting
differences, 593, 595
Target setting, effective,
429– 432
Taxes:
capital structure and,
122–123, 488
deferred, 175, 263
estimating after-tax cost of
debt, 324 –328
forecasting, 245 –246, 261,
263
Heineken, 221, 261, 263
historical performance
analysis, 175, 178–179,
210, 221
international, 599–603
cross-border taxation,
600–602

dividend imputation,
602–603
example of tax
calculation for a U.S.
company with/
without foreign tax
credits, 601
fiscal grouping, 600
relevant tax rate and
taxable income,
599–600
loss carryforwards,
345 –346
marginal/average, 178
Technology-mediatelecommunications
(TMT) sector, 11–12,
96 –97
Tenet Healthcare, 18
Thaler, Richard, 88
Thomson Financial investor
styles, 538
3Com, 92–93, 98
Time-to-expire, 565
Time Warner, 85, 381, 444
Total System Services
(TSYS), 194
Tracking portfolio, 133, 345
Tracking stock, 479,
483 – 484
Trade sales, 478
Transition probability:
revenue growth
(1994 –2003), 159
ROIC (1994 –2003), 152
Translation, international
accounting differences,
593, 594
Transparency, 529–535
Turnover, 259–260
Two-stage DCF valuation
model, 95
Uncertainty:
certainty of, 668–669
value and, 561–566
Unilever, 93, 94, 98, 514,
610
Unintended consequences,
427
Units, 138
U.S. Treasuries, 326
Valuation frameworks,
103 –133
alternatives to DCF,
132–133

741

DCF approaches:
discounting pretax cash
f low, 131–132
using real cash f lows
and discount rates,
131
DCF-based valuation
models (five),
overview, 104 (see also
specific models)
adjusted present value,
104, 121–127
capital cash f low, 104,
127–128
economic profit, 104,
118–121
enterprise discounted
cash f low, 104 –118
equity cash f low, 104,
128–130
multiples, 132 (see also
Multiples)
real options, 132–133
Valuation results, calculating
and interpreting,
339–368
art of valuation, 363
equity value, calculating,
341–357
example valuation
buildup, 342
nonequity claims, 346 –357
nonoperating assets,
342–346
two general rules, 341
value per share, 357
Heineken case, 363 –368
business-as-usual,
364 –366
DCF valuation, 364
economic profit
valuation, 365
equity, value of, 366
scenarios, 366 –368
sensitivity analysis, 368
operations, calculating
value of, 339–341
discounting continuing
value, 340
discounting free cash
f lows, 340
scenarios, multiple, 357–361
verifying:
consistency check,
361–362
plausibility analysis,
362–363

742

INDEX

Valuation results, calculating
and interpreting
(Continued)
sensitivity analysis, 362,
368
Value, continuing. See
Continuing value,
estimating
Value-Based Management
(VBM), 417– 418
Value creation, 47–68
case illustration (Fred’s
Hardware), 47–54
early years, 47– 48
equivalence of DCF and
economic profit
valuation, 51
expanding into related
formats, 53 –54
going public, 50–53
growing the business,
48–50
lessons, 54
DCF and, 54 –63 (see also
Discounted cash f low
(DCF))
drivers of cash f low and
value, 56 –60
intuition behind (Value,
Inc. and Volume,
Inc.), 55 –56
economic theory/
framework for, 137–144
capital efficiency, 138,
137–140
cost competitiveness, 137
examples of peak ROIC
and sustainability,
141–143
general model, 138
price premium, 137
recouping initial
invest ments or early
losses, 143 –144
sustainability, 140–141
units, 138
mind-set, 419– 420
principles, 4
ROIC and growth drive
multiples, 65 –67
Zen of corporate finance,
61–63
Value driver(s):
defining, 421– 422
economics, 361

formula, 137
metrics:
developing, 422– 429
disseminating, 429
performance and health,
384
pharmaceutical company
example, 428
Value investors versus
growth investors, 538
Value management, 3 –21
creating healthier
companies, 4, 19–21, 23
deviations associated with
sloppy economic
analysis, 15 –18
markets and economic
fundamentals, 5 –14
(see also Stock market)
optimism, cautious, 21
Value manager (case
illustration), 23 – 45, 465
CEO as corporate
strategist, 25 –39
company’s “as is” value,
29–32
company’s potential
value with internal
improvements,
32–35
company’s potential
value to other
owners, 35 –37
current valuation,
25 –29
new growth
opportunities, 37–38
potential value of
financial
engineering, 38–39
CEO as value manager,
39– 45
compensation tied to
value creation,
43 – 44
developing investor
communications
strategy, 44
developing valueoriented targets and
performance
measures, 42
overhauling business
performance
reviews, 43

putting value into
planning and
invest ment analysis,
40– 42
reshaping CFO’s role,
44 – 45
value created through
reestructuring, 40
situation, 23 –25
CEO’s perspective, 25
financial performance,
24 –25
Value per share, calculating,
357
Value trees, 424, 425, 426
WAAC. See Weighted average
cost of capital (WAAC)
Wal-Mart:
key value drivers (2003),
660, 661
performance measurement,
393, 398, 399, 402, 405,
408, 409, 410
revenue growth, 239, 658,
666
sustainability, 140–141
Weighted average cost of
capital (WAAC):
continuing value and,
279
discounting free cash f low
at, 113 –114
economic profit and the
key value driver
formula, 711–712
emerging markets, 646
estimating cost of capital,
298–300, 333
in proof of equivalence
between discounted
cash f low and
discounted economic
profit, 713 –714
in Zen formula, 61
Witter, Jonathan, 536, 538,
541–542
Write-offs, 82
Yahoo!, 16, 388
Zen formula of corporate
finance, 61–63

